“Ge
KICD

KENYA INSTITUTE OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
A Skilled and Bifiical Saciety

SENIOR SCHOOL CURRICULUM DESIGN

BIOLOGY
GRADE 11

OCTOBER, 2025

First Published in 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transcribed, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

ISBN: 978-9914-43-065-3

Published and printed by Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development

TABLE OF CONTENTS
NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION ...

THE SENIOR SCHOOL IN THE COMPETENCY BASED CURRICULUM...
LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SENIOR SCHOOL.......
TABLE 1: LIST OF SUBJECTS AT SENIOR SCHOOL ....
TABLE 2: LESSON DISTRIBUTION AT SENIOR SCHOOL
ESSENCE STATEMENT
SUBJECT GENERAL LEARNING OUTCOMEG...............
SUMMARY STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS 00.0022...
STRAND 1.0: CELL BIOLOGY AND BIODIVERSITY ....
STRAND 2.0: ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PLANTS
STRAND 3.0: ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF ANIMALS..
APPENDIX: SUGGESTEDD METHODS, LEARNING RESOURCES AND NON-FORMAL ACTIVITIES. .........000:-00000s0+e



NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION

Education in Kenya should:

1. Foster nationalism and patriotism and promote national unity.
Kenya’s people belong to different communities, races and religions, but these differences need not divide them. They must be able to
live and interact as Kenyans. It is a paramount duty of education to help young people acquire this sense of nationhood by resolving
conflicts and promoting positive attitudes of mutual respect which enable them to live together in harmony and foster patriotism in order
to make a positive contribution to the life of the nation.

2. Promote the social, economic, technological and industrial needs for national development.

Education should prepare the youth of the country to play an effective and productive role in the life of the nation.

a) Social Needs
Education in Kenya must prepare children for changes in attitudes and relationships which are necessary for the smooth progress of a
rapidly developing modern economy. There is bound to be a silent social revolution following in the wake of rapid modernization.
Education should assist our youth to adapt to this change.

b) Economic Needs
Education in Kenya should produce citizens with the skills, knowledge, expertise and personal qualities that are required to support a
growing economy. Kenya is building up a modern and independent economy which is in need of an adequate and relevant domestic
workforce.

c) Technological and Industrial Needs
Education in Kenya should provide learners with the necessary skills and attitudes for industrial development. Kenya recognizes the
rapid industrial and technological changes taking place, especially in the developed world. We can only be part of this development
if our education system is deliberately focused on the knowledge, skills and attitudes that will prepare our young people for these
changing global trends.

3. Promote individual development and self-fulfillment
Education should provide opportunities for the fullest development of individual talents and personality. It should help children to develop
their potential interests and abilities. A vital aspect of individual development is the building of character

ii

4. Promote sound moral and religious values.
Education should provide for the development of knowledge, skills and attitudes that will enhance the acquisition of sound moral values
and help children to grow up into self-disciplined, self-reliant and integrated citizens.

5. Promote social equality and responsibility.
Education should promote social equality and foster a sense of social responsibility within an education system which provides equal
educational opportunities for all. It should give all children varied and challenging opportunities for collective activities and corporate
social service irrespective of gender, ability or geographical environment.

6. Promote respect for and development of Kenya’s rich and varied cultures,
Education should instill in the youth of Kenya an understanding of past and present cultures and their valid place in contemporary society.
Children should be able to blend the best of traditional values with the changing requirements that must follow rapid development in order
to build a stable and modern society.

7. Promote international consciousness and foster positive attitudes towards other nations.
Kenya is part of the international community. It is part of the complicated and interdependent network of peoples and nations. Education
should therefore lead the youth of the country to accept membership of this international community with all the obligations and
responsibilities, rights and benefits that this membership entails.

8. Promote positive attitudes towards good health and environmental protection.
Education should inculcate in young people the value of good health in order for them to avoid indulging in activities that will lead to
physical or mental ill health. It should foster positive attitudes towards environmental development and conservation. It should lead the
youth of Kenya to appreciate the need for a healthy environment.

iii

THE SENIOR SCHOOL IN THE COMPETENCY BASED CURRICULUM

Senior School is the fourth level of Basic Education in the Competency Based Curriculum (CBC) that the learner shall proceed to after the
Pre-Primary School, Primary School and Junior School levels. The essence of Senior School is to offer learners a pre-tertiary/university/ pre-
career experience in which the learners have an opportunity to choose pathways, tracks and subjects where they shall have demonstrated
interest and/or potential at the earlier levels. Senior School comprises three years of education for learners generally in the 16-18 years age
bracket and lays the foundation for further education and training at the tertiary level and the world of work. In the CBC vision, learners exiting
this level are expected to be engaged, empowered and ethical citizens ready to participate in the socio-economic development of the nation.

At this level, the learner shall take seven (7) learning areas as recommended by the Presidential Working Party on Educational Reforms
(PWPER, 2023). These shall comprise four compulsory learning areas namely: English, Kiswahili, Essential Mathematics/Core
Mathematics and Community Service Learning (CSL). Learners will choose between Core Mathematics (for learners pursuing the Science
Technology Engineering and Mathematics Pathway) and Essential Mathematics (for learners pursuing the non-STEM pathways). The learner
will select three learning areas depending on their career choice, aptitude, interest and personality with guidance by the Senior School career
teacher.

LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SENIOR SCHOOL
vi the end of Senior School, the learner should be able to:
communicate effectively and utilise information and communication technology across varied contexts,
2 apply mathematical, logical and critical thinking skills for problem solving,
3. apply basic research and scientific skills to manipulate the environment and solve problems,
4. exploit individual talents for leisure, self-fulfilment, career growth, further education and training,
5. uphold national, moral and religious values and apply them in day-to-day life,
6. apply and promote health care strategies in day-to-day life,
7. protect, preserve and improve the environment for sustainability,
8. demonstrate active local and global citizenship for harmonious co-existence,
9. demonstrate appreciation of diversity in people and cultures,
10. manage pertinent and contemporary issues responsibly.


5. demonstrate active local and global citizenship for harmonious co-existence,
9. demonstrate appreciation of diversity in people and cultures,
10. manage pertinent and contemporary issues responsibly.

iv
TABLE 1: LIST OF SUBJECTS AT SENIOR SCHOOL
Core Subjects Arts & Sports Social Sciences Science, Technology, Engineering &
Science Mathematics (STEM)
1. English 5. Sports and 9. Literature in English 23. Biology
2. Kiswahili/KSL Recreation 10. Indigenous Languages 24. Chemistry
3. Core Mathematics/ 6. Music and Dance 11. Fasihi ya Kiswahili 25. Physics
Essential Mathematics | 7. Theatre and Film | 12. Sign Language 26. General Science
4. Community Service 8. Fine Arts 13. Arabic 27. Agriculture
Learning (CSL) 14. French 28. Computer Studies
15. German 29. Home Science
16. Mandarin Chinese 30. Aviation
17. Christian Religious Education 31. Building Construction
18. Islamic Religious Education 32. Electricity
19. Hindu Religious Education 33. Metalwork
20. Business Studies 34. Power Mechanics
21. History and Citizenship 35. Woodwork
22. Geography 36. Media Technology

37._Marine and Fisheries Technology

Note:
a) Physical Education (PE) and Information Communication and Technology (ICT) will be offered to all learners to facilitate learning,
enjoyment and acquisition of life skills.
b) Every school shall offer Pastoral/Religious Programme of Instruction (P/RPI) to enhance moral, spiritual and character development
of the learners.
c) There shall be one (1) lesson for personal or group study to deepen knowledge and enhance skills in areas of choice by the learners.
Table 2 provides guidelines on distribution of lessons at Senior School.

TABLE 2: LESSON DISTRIBUTION AT SENIOR SCHOOL

Subjects No of Lessons Per Week
(40 minutes per lesson)

Core Subjects 4

1. English 5
2. Kiswahili 5
3. Essential Mathematics/Core Mathematics 5
4. Community Service Learning 3
Elective Subjects
5. Elective 1 5
6. Elective 2 5
7. Elective 3 5
* Physical Education El
* ICT Skills 2
*PPI 1
* Learner Personal /Group Study i
Total Number of Lessons 40
vi
ESSENCE STATEMENT

In Senior School, Biology builds on the foundational knowledge and scientific skills acquired in Integrated Science in Junior School. At this
level, learners deepen their understanding of the structure and functions of living organisms, their life processes, interaction within the
ecosystems, and the continuity of life through reproduction and inheritance. The subject focuses on equipping leamers with skills in
observation, inquiry, critical thinking, and scientific reasoning. Emphasis is laid on understanding the relevance of Biology in everyday life
and its role in addressing real-world issues such as health, food security, and environmental conservation.

Learning in Biology will focus on practical activities, experiments, and scientific investigations. Learners will engage in research, data
analysis, and effective communication of findings. The approach will foster the development of core competencies like collaborative
learning, critical thinking, and problem-solving. It will also promote learning to learn, where the learners will apply biological concepts to
new situations and ensure holistic development. This will not only equip learners for higher learning and the world of work but also for
nature-responsible citizenship.

Biology will open up diverse career pathways for learners, especially in fields related to health, agriculture, environmental management, and
research. The subject lays a solid foundation for professions such as medicine, nursing, veterinary science, biotechnology, microbiology,
environmental science, public health, and forensic science. It also supports innovation and entrepreneurship in areas like pharmaceuticals,
food technology, and conservation, thereby contributing to Kenya’s socio-economic development and global competitiveness.

SUBJECT GENERAL LEARNING OUTCOMES

By the end of the course, the learner should be able to:
1. develop relevant knowledge, skills and attitudes for further education and for training in biology related scientific fields;
2. demonstrate an understanding of interrelationships among humans. other organisms and their environment and apply the


By the end of the course, the learner should be able to:

1. develop relevant knowledge, skills and attitudes for further education and for training in biology related scientific fields;

2. demonstrate an understanding of interrelationships among humans, other organisms and their environment and apply the
knowledge to conserve nature;

3. describe features of various groups of living organisms and identify unknown organisms using simple biological keys;

4. apply the knowledge gained on human body systems and functions to improve the quality of life for self and the community
while enhancing healthy living;

vii

5. design and carry out practical activities and projects that will enable them to understand biological concepts;

6. demonstrate relevant technical skills and scientific knowledge necessary for socio-economic development;

7. demonstrate resourcefulness in designing projects necessary for community service learning;

8. communicate biological information in a precise, clear and logical manner;

9. apply knowledge on plant and animal structure and functions to industrialization, innovation and sustainability of life;

10. use knowledge gained to make informed decisions about scientifically-based personal and societal issues to solve emerging
issues in health and environment

viii
SUMMARY STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS
Strand Sub Strand
1.0 Cell Biology and Biodiversity 1.1 Taxonomy I
1.2 Ecology

1.3 Taxonomy II

1.4 Cell Division

2.0 Anatomy and Physiology of Plants 2.1 Reproduction in Plants

2.2 Growth and Development in Plants

2.3 Excretion in Plants

3.0 Anatomy and Physiology of Animals 3.1 Reproduction in Animals

3.2 Growth and Development in Animals

3.3 Excretion and Homeostasis in Animals

ix
STRAND 1.0: CELL BIOLOGY AND BIODIVERSITY
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested Key
Outcomes
Question(s)
1.0 Cell 1.1 Taxonomy I By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guided to: How are living
logy and the learner should be able e search for information on the organisms
Biodiversity | , Meaning and to: a meaning and significance of classified?
significance of a) explain the significance taxonomy, and share with peers,
taxonomy of classification of living] e design charts to show the
. organisms in nature, hierarchy of major taxonomic
e@ Taxonomic units b) illustrate the hierarchy, units of classification, and
and nomenclature of the major taxonomic present to peers,
© Five Kingdoms of units of classification, © discuss the principles of
classification- c) describe the principles binomial nomenclature with
Monera. Protoctista. of binomial - peers,


© Five Kingdoms of units of classification, |e discuss the principles of

classification- c) describe the principles binomial nomenclature with
Monera, Protoctista, of binomial - peers,
Fungi, Plantae, and nomenclature in. © name common organisms in the
Animalia (General classification of living local environment using
characteristics of organisms, 7 principles of binomial
the five kingdoms; d) classify organisms into nomenclature,
Economic the five taxonomic © explore the local
importance of Kingdoms, environment/print media/non
Kingdoms Monera, ©) appreciate the print media to observe and
Protoctista and importance of taxonomy classify organisms into
Fungi) Kingdom Monera, Protoctista,
1
in biodiversity Fungi, Plantae, and Animalia
conservation. (Note: Observe road safety

during the activity),

e use hand lenses and light
microscopes to observe
specimens in Kingdoms Monera,
Protoctista, and Fungi,

© explore the community to
appreciate the economic
importance of organisms in
Kingdoms Monera, Protoctista,
and Fungi, and discuss with
peers.

Core Competencies to be developed:

¢ Communication and Collaboration: The learner contributes to group decision-making while exploring the local
environment/print media/non print media to observe and classify organisms.

© Self-efficacy: The learner's confidence is enhanced as they design charts to show the hierarchy of major taxonomic units
of classification and present them to peers.

Values

¢ Respect: The learner appreciates diverse opinions while discussing the principles of binomial nomenclature with peers.

e Responsibility: The learner observes safety precautions while naming common organisms in the local environment using
principles of binomial nomenclature.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

e Safety and Security: The learner observes road safety as they explore the local environment to observe and classify
organisms.

e Environmental Conservation: The learner appreciates the need to conserve biodiversity while discussing the economic
importance of organisms in Kingdoms Monera, Protoctista, and Fungi.

3
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Cell 1.2 Ecology By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: How do
Biology and strand, the learner should ilabl f organisms
Biodiversity be able to: e exp) lore available resources ‘Or interact with
Ecosystems (forest, information on terminologies :
grassland, desert, a) describe the used in ecology (habitat, niche, their
characteristics of environment?

and aquatic) population, community, biome,
ecosystem, biomass, carrying

capacity, ecological

different ecosystems in
e Adaptations of nature.



ne ee So ee ee Ge ee eee ee

characteristics of environment?

and aquatic) different ecosystems in pi iene, Moma it
e Adaptations of nature, ca 7 ji ecolo ‘ical EYES:

organisms to b) explain the adaptations ‘i wee ’, _ share with

different habitats of organisms to eer’, ,

(xerophytes, different habitats, pet

mesophytes, c) describe factors e explore the environment and

hydrophytes, affecting population other resources to observe the

halophytes, desert sizes in ecosystems, characteristics of different

and aquatic animals) | d) estimate population ecosystems (forest, grassland,
© Characteristics of sizes of organisms in ae eee ~— include

ecosystems, a
ite nae “ e) illustrate the nitrogen physiographic, and biotic
estimating population and carbon cycles in factors of the ecosystems).
. 5 ecosystems, Model the ecosystems, and

size (direct count and diseuse'with peers

sampling methods - Peas,

line transect, belt

4
transect, quadrat, f) describe the effects of :
pais observe specimens and
capture-recapture) pollution in the cuba 3
. multimedia (photographs,
environment,

e Factors that affect
populations in
ecosystems (biotic

videos, animations) showing
various adaptations of
organisms to different habitats,

g) appreciate the link
between environmental
pollution and climate

and abiotic factors), change. and discuss with peers,

e@ Nutrient cycles and e role-play and simulate
their importance in characteristics of a population
the ecosystems (density, dispersion, and
(nitrogen and carbon growth) and factors that affect
cycles) populations in ecosystems,

e Effects of e use direct count and sampling
environmental methods (line transect, belt
pollution (include transect, quadrat, capture-
global warming and recapture) to estimate the
climate change) number of organisms in given

ecosystems,

¢ draw charts and/or make
models to illustrate nitrogen
and carbon cycles, and present
to peers,

e explore the community and
other resources to observe and

discuss the effects of
environmental pollution and
suggest control measures,

@ brainstorm on the causes and
impacts of climate change,
record the main points, and
present to peers,

e@ make posters to sensitise the
community about the effects of
environmental pollution and
their mitigation measures.

Core Competencies to be developed:

© Citizenship: The learner solves problems in the local community as they make posters to sensitise the community about the
effects of environmental pollution.

¢ Self-efficacy: The learner communicates clearly with others while brainstorming on the causes and impacts of climate
change.



¢ Self-efficacy: The learner communicates clearly with others while brainstorming on the causes and impacts of climate
change.

Values

¢ Integrity: The learner utilises resources prudently while making charts and models to illustrate nitrogen and carbon cycles.

¢ Patriotism: The learner demonstrates love for the country while sensitising the community about the effects of
environmental pollution.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

« Waste Management: The learner appreciates the importance of proper waste management as they sensitise the community
about the effects of environmental pollution an.d their mitigation measures

e Prevention of Global Warming: The learner appreciates the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions while observing and
discussing the effects of environmental pollution.

7
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Cell 1.3 Taxonomy II By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: 1. How are
Biology and strand, the learner should « collaboratively search for plants and
Biodiversity Kingdom Plantae be able to: information on general 7 : animals F
(general a) outline the - characteristics of organisms in classified?
a characteristics of phyla/divisions Kingdom 2. How are
characteristics of 3 Janke Z
organisms in organisms in the Animalia and Plantae, viruses
Divisions divisions of Kingdom |e explore the local environment to important in
Bryophyta, Plantae, observe characteristics of nature?
Pteridophyta, and b) classify organisms into members of the various
S hr tne phyla and classes of divisions in Kingdom Plantae,
spermatophyta; 3 pee : ;
dnchutle'sich- Kingdom Animalia, and discuss with peers,
divisions and c) pose omens «use distinguishing features to
Classes of landmass ty plants! group specimens into sub-
Spermatophyta) A mals, . divisions of Spermatophyta
}) relate viruses to their (Gymnospermae and
e@ Kingdom Animalia economic importance in Angiospermae), and discuss
(general health, agriculture, and with peers,
characteristics of biotechnology, ¢ collect and observe specimens
organisms in €) appreciate the diversity of monocot and dicot plants and
Chordata and of plants and animals in discuss their distinguishing
Arthropoda up to nature. characteristics,
8
class level; include ¢ observe and group animals into
economic Phylum Chordata and
importance of Arthropoda using distinguishing
arthropods) characteristics, discuss with
¢ Dichotomous keys Pers,
(principles of use distinguishing features to
construction, place organisms in Phylum
identification of Chordata and Arthropoda into
organisms, and their taxonomic classes,
practical * construct and use dichotomous
applications) keys to identify various plants
; and animals,
© Viruses (general ¢ brainstorm with peers on the
characteristics, characteristics of viruses and
conditions for their economic importance.
growth, and
economic Projects
importance) Use locally available materials and
organisms within the school/home
environment to:
e Prepare herbarium specimens of
various plant species for future
reference during biological
studies.
9

| e Mount animal specimens/their


e@ Mount animal specimens/their
images on a soft board/wooden
surface/skin/carton or any
available surface. (Safe and
appropriate preservatives may
be used in the preservation of
some specimens as may be
necessary).

Core Competencies to be developed:

© Creativity and Imagination: The learner experiments with varied ideas while preparing a herbarium of plant specimens.

¢ Communication and Collaboration: The learner speaks clearly to peers while discussing distinguishing characteristics of
various specimens.

Values
© Respect: The learner is considerate of others’ opinions while brainstorming on the characteristics of viruses and their
econo! importance.

¢ Responsibility: The learner cares for the environment while collecting specimens of monocot and dicot plants.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

¢ Environmental Conservation: The learner conserves biodiversity by responsibly collecting organisms for the preparation of
herbarium specimens.

e Animal Welfare: The learner handles animals with care while observing and grouping them into Phylum Chordata and
Arthropoda using distinguishing characteristics.

10
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Cell 1.4 Cell Division By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: How is cell
Biology and strand, the learner should be | carry out practical activities to | division
Biodiversity Meaning of cell able to: discuss the meaning important?
division aud ewuctte a) explain the significance *® use models and drawings to
of chromosomes of Mitosis and meiosis explain the meaning and
in organisms, significance of cell division
e@ Types of cell b) illustrate the stages of and illustrate the structure of
division (mitosis and mitosis and meiosis in chromosomes. Discuss with
meiosis) cells, peers,
© Significance of cell c) distinguish between © watch animations showing
division in organisms budding and binary Various stages of mitosis
(include tissue fission in relation to cell and meiosis, and discuss
culture) division, with peers,
d) recognise the * use models and charts to
¢ Budding and binary importance of cell illustrate the behaviour of
fission division in reproduction, chromosomes at various
growth, and stages of cell division
development. (mitosis and meiosis), and
present to peers,
11

© use a light microscope to
observe stages of meiosis
and mitosis in living tissues,

¢ model budding in yeast and
binary fission in bacteria
and discuss with peers.

Core Competencies to be developed:

¢ Creativity and Imagination: The learner innovatively models budding in yeast and binary fission in bacteria.

e Digital Literacy: The learner enhances computing skills while watching animations showing various stages of mitosis and
meiosis.

Values
¢ Unity: The learner collaborates with others while using a light microscope to observe stages of meiosis and mitosis in
living tissues.

© Respect: The learner appreciates others’ efforts while presenting illustrations to show the behaviour of chromosomes in
various stages of cell division.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

e Safety and Security: The learner observes safety precautions while using a light microscope to observe stages of meiosis
and mitosis in living tissues.

« Communicable Diseases: The learner recognizes the importance of healthy practices for prevention of communicable
diseases while modelling budding in yeast and binary fission in bacteria.

12


Suggested Assessment Rubric

Level | Exceeds Expectations | Meets Expectations | Approaches Expectations | Below Expectations

Indicator
Ability to illustrate | Illustrates the hierarchy | Illustrates the Illustrates the hierarchy of | Illustrates the hierarchy
the hierarchy of the | of all the major hierarchy of all the 4-6 major taxonomic units | of 1-3 major taxonomic
major taxonomic taxonomic units of major taxonomic of classification units of classification
units of classification with units of classification
classification relevant examples

of organisms for each

taxon
Ability to estimate | Estimates population Estimates population | Estimates population sizes | Estimates population
population sizes of | sizes of organisms in sizes of organisms in | of organisms in ecosystems | sizes of organisms in
organisms in ecosystems using all 5 | ecosystems using all | using 2-4 methods ecosystems using |
ecosystems methods with clear 5 methods method

justification for each

method
Ability to classify | Accurately classifies Accurately classifies | Accurately classifies Classifies some
organisms into organisms into all phyla | organisms into all organisms into either phyla | organisms into either
phyla and classes of | and classes of Kingdom | phyla and classes of _| or classes of Kingdom phyla or classes of
Kingdom Animalia | Animalia citing Kingdom Animalia | Animalia Kingdom Animalia

distinguishing features

13
Level | Exceeds Expectations | Meets Expectations | Approaches Expectations | Below Expectations

Indicator
Ability to illustrate | Illustrates the stages of | Illustrates the stages _| Illustrates the stages of Illustrates some stages
the stages of mitosis and meiosis in _ | of mitosis and either mitosis or meiosis in | of either mitosis or
mitosis and meiosis | cells, explaining the meiosis in cells cells meiosis in cells
in cells significance of each

stage

14

STRAND 2.0: ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF PLANTS

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Anatomy 2.1 Reproduction in By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: 1. What is the
and Physiology Plants strand, the learner ¢ discuss asexual reproduction significance
of Plants should be able to: in plants with peers, of
Asexual a) describe asexual © observe vegetative : reproduction

reproduction reproduction in propagation of plants in the in plants?

(Sporulation and plants, locality or digital resources, | 2. How does

vegetative b) identify flowers and discuss with peers, reproduction

propagation - based on their floral | observe specimens of flowers occur in

igation c a
include specialised parts, from different plants and plants?
vegetative structures c) illustrate classify the flowers based on
mechanisms and floral parts
such as runners, < >
bulbs, corms, features that hinder | use models and charts to
nn 7 self-pollination and illustrate mechanisms and
rhizomes, offshoots, self-fertilisation in eetuies that taderaclh?
tubers and cuttings) . features that hinder self-
plants, pollination and self-
e@ Sexual reproduction | d) describe the process fertilisation in plants, and

in flowering plants of double present to peers,

Identification of fertilisation in ¢ watch animations illustrating

flowers based on the flowering plants, double fertilisation and

position of the e) acknowledge the

15


ovary, symmetry, importance of sexual formation of seeds and fruits.

inflorescence, and asexual Discuss with peers,

presence of male reproduction in ¢ examine, draw and label

and female parts plants. sections of fruits, and discuss
-Mechanisms and their placentation and
features that hinder classification,

self- pollination and ¢ brainstorm on the advantages
self-fertilisation and disadvantages of sexual
-Double fertilisation and asexual reproduction in
and its significance plants.

~Seed and fruit

development

(include

placentation and
classification of
Sruits)

Core Competencies to be developed:

«© Communication and Collaboration: The learner cooperates with others while observing and classifying specimens of
flowers from different plants.

¢ Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: The learner analyses causes and effects while brainstorming on the advantages and
disadvantages of sexual and asexual reproduction in plants.

Values
© Social Justice: The learner shares resources equitably while examining, drawing, and labelling sections of fruits.

16

¢ Love: The learner prioritises others’ interests while using models and charts to illustrate mechanisms and features that
hinder self- pollination and self-fertilisation in plants.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

¢ Environment and Technology: The learner appreciates the use of technology in managing the environment while watching
animations illustrating double fertilisation and formation of seeds and fruits.

« Online Safety: The learner explores safe internet sites while watching animations illustrating double fertilisation and
formation of seeds and fruits.

17
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Anatomy 2.2 Growth and By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guide to: How does growth
and Physiology Development | the learner should be able to: | e brainstorm on the meaning occur in plants?
of Plants in Plants a) distinguish between and significance of growth
growth and development and development in living
. in living organisms, organisms,
° aay b) relate structures of © observe, draw, and label the
development monocot and dicot seeds structures of monocot and
to their functions, dicot seeds, and discuss the
¢ Structure of the |c) outline causes and ways functions of the structures
seed (monocots of breaking dormancy in with peers,
and dicots) seeds, N © examine seed specimens or
© Seed dormancy d) investigate conditions photographs to identify
(meaning, necessary for seed causes of seed dormancy, and
significance, germination, 7 discuss with peers,
caes and e) investigate types of © carry out activities to
ways of germination in plants, demonstrate ways of
breaking seed f) illustrate primary and breaking seed dormancy,
dormancy) secondary growth in © use locally available seeds
flowering plants, and materials to investigate

e Germination

(process, typ conditions necessary for seed
races, types,



a flowering plants. 7 i i i
ig plants, and materials to investigate

¢ Germination conditions necessary for seed

(process, types,

18
and conditions |g) demonstrate the role of germination, and discuss with
necessary for hormones in plant peers,
germination) growth and development, | ® carry out experiments to
© Primary and h) appreciate the investigate different types of
secondary importance of | growth germination (hypogeal and
growth and development in epigeal) using locally
plants. available seeds, and present
@ Measurement their work to peers,
of growth and © observe sections of stems
growth curves under a light microscope or
© Roleof photomicrographs showing
hormones in primary and secondary
plant growth growth in plants. Draw and
and label the observed sections
development and present to peers,
(include apical © use models and drawings to
dominance) illustrate stages of secondary
growth in a woody
dicotyledonous plant and
present to peers,

e plant locally available seeds
and use the seedlings to
determine regions of growth,
and discuss with peers,

19

© record experimental data
(such as height of seedling or
width of stem) froma
growing seedling, draw
growth curves, and discuss

with peers,
© watch animations illustrating
the effect of plant growth

hormones and their
application in agriculture.

Project:

Establish a tree nursery by
generating roots on stem cuttings
using natural sources of
hormones (such as bulb onions,
Aloe spp., cinnamon). Sell the
seedlings to members of the
community at a subsidized price.

Core Competencies to be developed:

© Citizenship: The learner solves problems in the community by sharing the seedlings from the established tree nursery.

e Learning to Learn: The learner reflects on their own work and adjusts accordingly while carrying out activities to
demonstrate ways of breaking seed dormancy.

20

Values

« Unity: The learner works harmoniously with others while carrying out experiments to investigate conditions necessary for
seed germination.

¢ Patriotism: The learner demonstrates devotion to the country/community while sharing seedlings with the school
community for environmental conservation.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

¢ Financial Literacy: The learner explores ways of generating income while selling seedlings to members of the community.

¢ Prevention of Global Warming: The learner mitigates the effects of global warming by establishing a tree nursery and
distributing seedlings in the community.



21

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)

2.0 Anatomy | 2.3 Excretion in By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guided to: 1. How do plants
and Plants the learner should be able to:] ¢ discuss the meaning and eliminate
Physiology of a) describe ways through importance of excretion, and waste
Plants © Meaning and which plants eliminate brainstorm on reasons why products?

importance 6f waste products, plants lack complex 2. How do

a b) demonstrate ways excretory structures, humans use

excretion (include z :

reasons why through which plants take a nature walk in the plant excretory

plants lack eliminate waste school locality to observe products?

complex excretory products, p ways through which plants

structures) c) outline the economic eliminate wastes and discuss

importance of plant (Transpiration, diffusion,
¢ Methods of excretory products, deposition, organ/tissue fall,
excretion in plants | d) recognise the exudation and guttation),
e Economic importance of exeretory | carry out experiments to

importance of products in plants. demonstrate ways through

plant excretory which plants eliminate waste

products products, and report findings

to peers,

* search for information on
plant excretory products and

22

their economic importance,
and discuss with peers,

Project:

¢ Conduct interviews with
members of the local
communities about the uses
of various plant products.
Document the plant products
and their uses and make a
portfolio showing
photographs of the plants
and their excretory products.

Core Competencies to be developed:

« Learning to Learn: The learner shares information with others discussing plant excretory products and their economic
importance.

¢ Self-efficacy: The learner enhances self-confidence while carrying out experiments to demonstrate ways through which
plants eliminate waste products.

Values

* Respect: The learner is considerate of others’ opinions while brainstorming on reasons why plants lack complex excretory
structures.

e Integrity: The learner demonstrates honesty while reporting findings on ways through which plants eliminate waste
products.

23

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

« Drmugand Substance Abuse: The learner is sensitised about the effects of substance abuse while conducting interviews with
members of the local communities about the uses of various plant products.

e Financial Literacy: The learner appreciates the commercial value of plant excretory products while exploring and
brainstorming on their economic importance.



24

Suggested Assessment Rubric

Level Exceeds Expectations | Meets Expectations | Approaches Expectations | Below Expectations
Indicator
Ability to illustrate _ | Illustrates all Illustrates all Illustrates 3-5 mechanisms | Illustrates 1-2
mechanisms and mechanisms and mechanisms and and features that hinder mechanisms and
features that hinder | features that hinder self- | features that hinder | self-pollination and self- features that hinder self-
self- pollination and | pollination and self- self-pollination and | fertilisation in plants pollination and self-
self-fertilisation in fertilisation in plants self-fertilisation in fertilisation in plants
plants with relevant examples _ | plants

of plants

Ability to investigate | Investigates 3 conditions | Investigates 3 Investigates 2 conditions _| Investigates 1
conditions necessary | necessary for seed conditions necessary | necessary for seed condition necessary for
for seed germination | germination and for seed germination | germination seed germination

accounts for the
observations,

Ability to illustrate | Illustrates primary and. Illustrates primary _| Illustrates either primary Partially illustrates

primary and secondary growth in and secondary or secondary growth in either primary or
secondary growth in | flowering plants with growth in flowering | flowering plants secondary growth in
flowering plants illustrations plants flowering plants

25

wma Exceeds Expectations Meets Expectations | Approaches Expectations | Below Expectations

Indicator
Ability to describe Describes all ways Describes all ways | Describes 2-3 ways Describes 1 way
ways through which | through which plants through which through which plants through which plants
plants eliminate eliminate waste products, | plants eliminate eliminate waste products _| eliminate waste
waste products citing examples of plants | waste products products

26

STRAND 3.0: ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF ANIMALS

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested
outcomes Key Inquiry
Question(s)
3.0 Anatomy 3.1 Reproduction in | By the end of the sub _ | The learner is guided to: How do
and Physiology Animals strand, the learner © observe external fertilisation in animals
of Animals should be able to: animals (amphibians and fish) in reproduce?
© External a) describe external their habitats (ponds and aquaria) or
fertilisation in from other available resources, and

fertilisation in 5
= animals Piaanes uith near.


OF ABIMAIS SNOUIG DE adIe tO. animals (ampnibtans and fish) in reproduce £

© External a) describe external their habitats (ponds and aquaria) or
fertilisation in fertilisation in from other available resources, and
animals animals, discuss with peers,
b) describe types of | © search for information from
© Types of internal internal ayailable sources on types of internal
fertilisation fertilisation in fertilisation and share with peers,
(viviparous, animals, emake classification charts to group
oviparous and c) relate the structure animals based on types of internal
ovoviviparous of the male and fertilisation, and present to peers
animals) female © use models and charts to illustrate
© Structure of the reproductive the structure of the male and female
male and female systems to their reproductive systems and discuss
reproductive functions, their adaptations with peers,
systems d) describe the © dissect a small mammal to observe
Process of the reproductive system. Draw and
e@ Menstrual cycle fertilisation, label,
27
© Fettilisation, pregnancy, and © use drawings to illustrate the human
Pregnancy, birth birth in humans, sperm cell and ovum, and present to
and lactation e) describe the role of peers,
(include the hormones in © use digital devices to watch
structure of ovum human . animations showing fertilisation,
and sperm cell, reproduction, pregnancy, placenta and birth in
and role of f) appreciate the role humans; discuss with peers,
hormones) of biotechnology |» learn about the stages of pregnancy
in addressing and the process of childbirth from a
e Role of : human resource person (midwife or nurse)
biotechnology in reproduction to help mitigate postnatal maternal
human health. health issues,
reproduction e use charts to illustrate the role of
(surrogacy, sperm hormones in the human sexual cycle,
bank, in-vitro pregnancy, birth and lactation,
Jertilisation) discuss with peers,

* brainstorm on the effects of
undersecretion and oversecretion
(imbalance) of reproductive
hormones,

© debate on the role of biotechnology
in human reproduction, note down
the main points, and present to peers.

28

e Debate on the importance of joint
reproductive health choices made by
both male and female parents.

Core Competencies to be developed:

¢ Critical thinking and Problem Solving: The learner gives objective ideas to solve reproductive health problems while
debating on the role of biotechnology in human reproduction.

« Learning to Learn: The learner seeks information from the resource person while learning about the stages of pregnancy
and the process of childbirth from a resource person.

Values:

¢ Social Justice: The learner shares responsibilities fairly while making classification charts to group animals based on types
of internal fertilisation.

© Peace: The learner resolves differences amicably while debating on the role of biotechnology in human reproduction.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

e Menstrual Health Disorders Management: The leamer is sensitised on human menstrual health while illustrating the role of
hormones in the human sexual cycle.

« Human Sexuality: The leamer understands common myths and misconceptions around human sexuality while illustrating
the role of hormones in the human sexual cycle.

29
Strand Sub strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
3.0 Anatomy 3.2 Growth and By the end of the sub The learner is guide to: How does growth

Development in strand, the learner esearch for information from in animals occur?


Question(s)

3.0 Anatomy 3.2 Growth and By the end of the sub The learner is guide to: How does growth
and Physiology | Development in strand, the learner esearch for information from in animals occur?
of Animals Animals should be able to: available resources on types of
a) distinguish between growth in animals, and discuss
Metamorphosis complete and with peers,
(complete and incomplete ° use available resources to model
incomplete metamorphosis in life cycles of named insects and
metamorphosis Insects, make presentations to peers,
in insects) b) describe the role of | plot graphs to illustrate complete
hormones in growth and incomplete metamorphosis in
¢ Role of growth and development in insects, and present to peers,
hormones in insects, ¢ search for information on insect
Insects c) analyse growth hormones and their roles in
© Growth curves curves in animals, growth and development. Share
in animals d) appreciate the with peers,
(continuous and importance of © watch animations illustrating the
intermittent growth and? effect of hormones on insect
growth) — m growth and development,
animals.

© collect data (height, length, or
mass) of animals, plot and
interpret growth curves

30

(intermittent and sigmoid).
Calculate growth rates at different
growth phases.

Core Competencies to be developed

¢ Digital Literacy: The learner appropriately selects animations illustrating the effect of hormones on insect growth and
development.

© Creativity and Imagination: The learner adjusts and rethinks their ideas while modelling life cycles of different insects.

Values

© Love: The leamer handles insects with compassion as they collect data on animals to calculate growth rates at different
growth phases.

e Unity: The learner collaborates with others while plotting graphs to illustrate complete and incomplete metamorphosis in
Insects.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

« Good governance: The learner demonstrates principles of leadership while working with peers to search for information on
insect hormones and their roles in growth and development.

e Animal Welfare: The learner treats animals with care while collecting data for plotting growth curves in animals.

31
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
3.0 Anatomy 3.3 Excretion and By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: 1. How do
i Homeostasis in strand, the learner should |e explore available sources for animals get
Animals be able to: information on excretory rid of waste
. a) relate excretory structures and products in products?
e B . é
il oben structures to their insects, birds and fish, 2. How do
: products in insects, © dissect a mammalian kidney animals cope
animals (insects, : A
y , birds, and fish, to observe and draw the with
birds, freshwater A N :
. b) relate the internal internal structure. Discuss environmental
and marine fish) > z 9
structure of the with peers. (The kidney may changes?
e = Internal structure mammalian kidney to be obtained from a locally
of the mammalian its function, available animal),
kidney (cortex, c) describe the process of | ¢ model and label the internal
medulla, pelvis, urine formation in structure of a mammalian
structure and mammals, kidney and relate it to its
function of the d) relate the structure of functions. Present to peers,
nephron) the mammalian liver |. use digital devices to watch
© Process of urine and skin to their animations illustrating the
formation in excretory functions, process of urine formation in
mammals e)_ illustrate homeostatic mammals and discuss with
7 regulation in humans, peers,
32

7 = f)\ reflect on the eS en ee


© Internal structure | 1) feflect on the * observe photomicrographs or

of the mammalian importance of illustrations of the internal
skin, excretion and structure of the mammalian
homeostasis in liver and skin and relate them
@ Role of the liver animals. to their functions,
and skin in * use charts to illustrate
aoe, mechanisms of homeostasis
© Homeostatic in humans (osmoregulation,
regulation in blood sugar regulation,
humans thermoregulation-cover
(osmoregulation, homeostatic feedback
thermoregulation, mechanisms),
blood sugar * _ listen to a resource person to
regulation — learn about liver diseases and
include diabetes disorders in humans, and
mellitus and discuss with peers,
diabetes insipidus) * observe and/or discuss how

animals in the locality

Liver diseases and respond to changes in the

disorders environment (include
(cirrhosis, basking, hibernation,
hepatitis, fatty liver burrowing, panting,
disease).

aestivation).

33

Core Competencies to be developed:

¢ Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: The learner asks questions to be clear on what they need while discussing how
animals in the locality respond to changes in the environment.

¢ Digital Literacy: The learner uses digital technology effectively while using digital devices to watch animations on the
process of urine formation in mammals.

Values

¢ Social Justice: The learner shares resources equitably while modelling and labelling the internal structure of a mammalian
kidney.

¢ Responsibility: The learner engages in assigned roles and duties while dissecting a mammalian kidney to observe the
internal structure.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)

« Environmental Conservation: The learner observes laboratory safety while dissecting the mammalian kidney to observe
internal structure.

« Waste Management: The learner appreciated the need to conserve biodiversity while observing and discussing how
animals in the locality respond to changes in the environment

34
Suggested Assessment Rubric
Level Exceeds Expectations Meets Expectations | Approaches Below Expectations
Indicator Expectations
Ability to relate the | Relates the structure of Relates the structure | Relates the structure of | Relates the structure of
structure of the the male and female of the male and either the male or either the male or female
male and female reproductive systems to | female reproductive | female reproductive reproductive systems to
reproductive their functions with systems to their systems to their some of their functions
systems to their appropriate illustrations | functions functions
functions

Ability to describe | Describes the role of all | Describes the role of _| Describes the role of 2. | Describes the role of 1

the role of hormones in growth and _| all hormones in hormones in growth hormone in growth and
hormones in growth | development in insects, growth and and development in development in insects
and development in | citing the mode of action | development in insects

insects insects

Ability to relate the | Relates the structure of Relates the structure | Relates the structure of | Relates the structure of
structure of the the mammalian liver and | of the mammalian either the mammalian | either the mammalian
mammalian liver skin to their excretory liver and skin to their | liver or skin to their liver or skin to some of
and skin to their function, with relevant excretory functions excretory functions their excretory functions

excretory functions | illustrations

Ability to relate the | Relates all internal Relates all internal Relates 3-4 internal Relates 1-2 internal
internal structure of | structures of the structure of the structures of the structure of the

35


Level Exceeds Expectations Meets Eapectations | Approaches Below Expectations

Indicator Expectations
the mammalian mammalian kidney to its | mammalian kidney to | mammalian kidney to | mammalian kidney to
kidney to its function with appropriate | its function their functions their functions
function illustrations

36

APPENDIX: SUGGESTEDD METHODS, LEARNING RESOURCES AND NON-FORMAL ACTIVITIES

Assessment Methods in Science Learning Resources Non-Formal Activities
« Reflections ¢ Laboratory Apparatus and ¢ Visit the science historical sites.
* Game Playing Equipment e Use digital devices to conduct
«  Pre-Post Testing ¢ Textbooks scientific research.
*¢ Model Making ¢ Models e Organising walks to have live
« Explorations ¢ Digital media (Radio and TV learning experiences.
« Experiments education programmes, Kenya « Developing simple guidelines on
«Investigations education cloud and OERs) how to identify and solve some
« Conventions, Conferences and ¢ Print media (charts, pictures, community problems.

Debates journals, magazines) Conducting science document
¢ Teacher Observations ¢ Digital Devices analysis.
© Project ¢ Software e Participating in talks by resource
eJournals © Recordings persons on science concepts.
© Portfolio ¢ Resource persons e Participating in science clubs and

* Oral or Aural Questions societies, co

© Learner’s Profile e Attending and Participating in

© Written Tests Science and Engineering fairs.

¢ Anecdotal Records Organising and participating in
exchange programs.

Making oral presentations and
demonstrations on science issues.

37
