KIC

KENYA INSTITUTE OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
A Skilled and Ethical Society

SENIOR SCHOOL CURRICULUM DESIGN

CHEMISTRY
GRADE 11

OCTOBER, 2025

First Published in 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transcribed, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

ISBN: 978-9914-43-062-2

Published and printed by Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development

TABLE OF CONTENT

NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION ..
THE SENIOR SCHOOL IN THE COMPE CY BASED CURRICULUM.
LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SENIOR SCHOOL..........
TABLE 1: LIST OF SUBJECTS AT SENIOR SCHOOL ....0......0.-:c0sssscsesssseeesrseeesenesees
TABLE 2: LESSON DISTRIBUTION AT SENIOR SCHOOL
SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDB............
STRAND 1.0: INORGANIC CHEMISTRY .....
STRAND 2.0: PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY .............-.
APPENDIX: SUGGESTED RESOURCES, ASSESSME:

METHODS AND NON-FORMAL ACTIVI!

NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION

Education in Kenya should:

1. Foster nationalism and patriotism and promote national unity.
Kenya’s people belong to different communities, races and religions, but these differences need not divide them. They must be able
to live and interact as Kenyans. It is a paramount duty of education to help young people acquire this sense of nationhood by
removing conflicts and promoting positive attitudes of mutual respect which enable them to live together in harmony and foster
patriotism in order to make a positive contribution to the life of the nation.

2. Promote the social, economic, technological and industrial needs for national development.

Education should prepare the youth of the country to play an effective and productive role in the life of the nation.

a) Social Needs.
Education in Kenya must prepare children for changes in attitudes and relationships which are necessary for the smooth progress
of a rapidly developing modern economy. There is bound to be a silent social revolution following in the wake of rapid
modernization. Education should assist our youth to adapt to this change.

b) Economic Needs.
Education in Kenya should produce citizens with the skills, knowledge, expertise and personal qualities that are required to
support a growing economy. Kenya is building up a modem and independent economy which is in need of an adequate and
relevant domestic workforce.

c) Technological and Industrial Needs.
Education in Kenya should provide leamers with the necessary skills and attitudes for industrial development. Kenya recognizes
the rapid industrial and technological changes taking place, especially in the developed world. We can only be part of this
development if our education system is deliberately focused on the knowledge, skills and attitudes that will prepare our young
people for these changing global trends.

3. Promote individual development and self-fulfilment.
Education should provide opportunities for the fullest development of individual talents and personality. It should help children to
develop their potential interests and abilities. A vital aspect of individual development is the building of character.

4. Promote sound moral and religious values.

ii

Education should provide for the development of knowledge, skills and attitudes that will enhance the acquisition of sound moral
values and help children to grow up into self-disciplined, self-reliant and integrated citizens.

5. Promote social equity and responsibility.
Education should promote social equality and foster a sense of social responsibility within an education system which provides
equal educational opportunities for all. It should give all children varied and challenging opportunities for collective activities and
corporate social service irrespective of gender, ability or geographical environment.

6. Promote respect for and development of Kenya’s rich and varied cultures.
Education should instil in the youth of Kenya an understanding of past and present cultures and their valid place in contemporary
society. Children should be able to blend the best of traditional values with the changing requirements that must follow rapid
development in order to build a stable and moder society.

7. Promote international consciousness and foster positive attitudes towards other nations.
Kenya is part of the international community. It is part of the complicated and interdependent network of peoples and nations.
Education should therefore lead the youth of the country to accept membership of this international community with all the
obligations and responsibilities, rights and benefits that this membership entails.

8. Promote positive attitudes towards good health and environmental protection.
Education should inculcate in young people the value of good health in order for them to avoid indulging in activities that will
lead to physical or mental ill health. It should foster positive attitudes towards environmental development and conservation. It
should lead the youth of Kenya to appreciate the need for a healthy environment.

iii

THE SENIOR SCHOOL IN THE COMPETENCY BASED CURRICULUM

Senior School is the fourth level of Basic Education in the Competency Based Curriculum (CBC) that the learner shall proceed to after the
Pre-Primary School, Primary School and Junior School levels. The essence of Senior School is to offer learners a pre-tertiary/university/ pre-
career experience in which the learners have an opportunity to choose pathways, tracks and subjects where they shall have demonstrated
interest and/or potential at the earlier levels. Senior School comprises three years of education for learners generally in the 16-18 years age
bracket and lays the foundation for further education and training at the tertiary level and the world of work. In the CBC vision, learners exiting
this level are expected to be engaged, empowered and ethical citizens ready to participate in the socio-economic development of the nation.

At this level, the learner shall take seven (7) learning areas as recommended by the Presidential Working Party on Educational Reforms
(PWPER, 2023). These shall comprise four compulsory learning areas namely: English, Kiswahili, Essential Mathematics/Core
Mathematics and Community Service Learning (CSL). Learners will choose between Core Mathematics (for learners pursuing the Science
Technology Engineering and Mathematics Pathway) and Essential Mathematics (for learners pursuing the non-STEM pathways). The learner
will select three learning areas depending on their career choice, aptitude, interest and personality with guidance by the Senior School career
teacher.

LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SENIOR SCHOOL

By the end of Senior School, the learner should be able to:

1. communicate effectively and utilise information and communication technology across varied contexts,
2. apply mathematical, logical and critical thinking skills for problem solving,

3. apply basic research and scientific skills to manipulate the environment and solve problems,

4. exploit individual talents for leisure, self-fulfilment, career growth, further education and training,
5. uphold national, moral and religious values and apply them in day-to-day life,

6. apply and promote health care strategies in day-to-day life,

7. protect, preserve and improve the environment for sustainability,

8. demonstrate active local and global citizenship for harmonious co-existence,

9. demonstrate appreciation of diversity in people and cultures,

10. manage pertinent and contemporary issues responsibly.

8. demonstrate active local and global citizenship for harmonious co-existence,
9. demonstrate appreciation of diversity in people and cultures,
10. manage pertinent and contemporary issues responsibly.

iv
TABLE 1: LIST OF SUBJECTS AT SENIOR SCHOOL
Core Subjects Arts & Sports Social Sciences Science, Technology, Engineering &
Science Mathematics (STEM)
T. English 5. Sports and 9. Literature in English 23. Biology
2. Kiswahili/KSL Recreation 10. Indigenous Languages 24. Chemistry
3. Core Mathematics/ 6. Music and Dance 11. Fasihi ya Kiswahili 25. Physics
Essential Mathematics 7. Theatre and Film 12. Sign Language 26. General Science
4. Community Service 8. Fine Arts 13. Arabic 27. Agriculture
Learning (CSL) 14. French 28. Computer Studies
15. German 29. Home Science
16. Mandarin Chinese 30. Aviation
17. Christian Religious Education 31. Building Construction
18. Islamic Religious Education 32. Electricity
19. Hindu Religious Education 33. Metalwork
20. Business Studies 34. Power Mechanics
21. History and Citizenship 35. Woodwork
22. Geography 36. Media Technology

37._ Marine and Fisheries Technology

Note:
a) Physical Education (PE) and Information Communication and Technology (ICT) will be offered to all learners to facilitate learning,
enjoyment and acquisition of life skills.
b) Every school shall offer Pastoral/Religious Programme of Instruction (P/RPI) to enhance moral, spiritual and character development
of the learners.

c) There shall be one (1) lesson for personal or group study to deepen knowledge and enhance skills in areas of choice by the learners.
Table 2 provides guidelines on distribution of lessons at Senior School.

v

TABLE 2: LESSON DISTRIBUTION AT SENIOR SCHOOL

Subjects No of Lessons Per Week
(40 minutes per lesson)

Core Subjects 4

1. English S
2. Kiswahili b
3._ Essential Mathematics/Core Mathematics 5
4. Community Service Learning 3
Elective Subjects
5. Elective 1 5
6. Elective 2 5
7. Elective 3 5
* Physical Education 3
* ICT Skills 2
PPI 7
* Learner Personal /Group Study 7
Total Number of Lessons 40
vi

By the end of Senior School, the learner should be able to:

1. Acquire scientific knowledge, skills, values and attitudes for everyday use, and further education and training;

2. Conduct a range of scientific investigations, including collection of qualitative and quantitative data, analysis and
interpretation of results;

3. Use scientific language in the study of Chemistry;

4. Develop skills and logical thinking in carrying out project work, field work and excursions, where chemistry can be
appreciated on a larger scale;

5. Relate Chemistry in the classroom to modern industrial processes and real world situations;

6. Develop critical thinking skills to explain phenomena and address challenges in day to day life;

7. Explore, manipulate, manage and conserve the environment for learning and sustainable development;

8. Apply principles of Chemistry and acquired skills to invent, formulate, construct, produce or manufacture useful products
from available resources for sustainable development;

9. Develop interest in and appreciation of Chemistry as a subject and its usefulness in the society.

vii

SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS
Strand Sub Strand

1.0 Inorganic Chemistry 1.1. The mole

1.2. Non-metals

2.0 Physical Chemistry 2.1. Salts
2.2. Gas Laws

2.3 Reaction Rates

3.0 Organic Chemistry 3.1 Hydrocarbons

viii

STRAND 1.0: INORGANIC CHEMISTRY

Strand Sub-Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested
Outcomes Key Inquiry
Question
1.0 Inorganic | 1.1The Mole By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: How is a mole
chemistry e Amount of strand, the learner © carry out activities to demonstrate the | a real
substance. should be able to: concept of mole as a unit of quantity?
« Relative atomic | a) describe the mole as measurement,
mass. aunit of e discuss the relationship between the
¢ Conversion of measurement, Avogradro’s number, the mole and
mass to moles. b) determine the the molar mass of a substance,
© Conversion of empirical and ¢ practice calculations involving
moles to mass. molecular formula of amount of substances, number of
© numberof compounds, particles, (atoms, molecules, ions...)
particles c) prepare standard and molar quantities,
Determination of solutions from solid | carry Out activities to determine the
formulae and liquid empirical formula of compounds
© Empirical substances, (MgO, CuO),
d) determine the ¢ practice calculations involving
formula. aes pe
concentration of determination of empirical and
«Molecular solutions, molecular formula of compounds,
formula. 5 e) determine the e perform experiments to prepare
Molar Solutions amount of standard solutions from solid and
Preparation. liquid substances,
1
e¢ Concentration substances in © carry out titrations and solve
and dilution. chemical reactions, problems involving molar solutions,
e Acid—base f) appreciate the e work out amount of substances,
titrations. applications of redox number of particles and molar
e redox titrations. titrations in industry quantities using chemical equations
= mole ratios (mole ratios and molar gas volume),
«molar gas e observe safety precautions while
volume carrying out titrations and dispose

waste responsibly,
e discuss the applications of redox
titrations in industry.

Core competencies to be developed:
Communication and Collaboration: The learner shows teamwork by contributing to group decision making through
participating actively during the preparation of standard solutions.

Values:

Communication and Collaboration: The learner shows teamwork by contributing to group decision making through
participating actively during the preparation of standard solutions.

Values:

e Responsibility: The learner observes safety precautions while carrying out titrations and dispose of waste responsibly,

« Social justice: The learner works harmoniously with peers while discussing the relationship between the Avogradro’s
number, the mole and the molar mass of a substance.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)
Waste management: The learner observes safety precautions while carrying out titrations and disposes waste responsibly.

2
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested
Outcomes Experiences Key Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Inorganic 1.2 Non-metals By the end of the sub__| The learner is guided to: How do gases
Chemistry e@ Sources of selected non- strand, the learner e brainstorm on the affect our day-
metals (hydrogen, nitrogen should be able to: sources of oxygen, to-day life?
and oxygen), a) identify sources of nitrogen and hydrogen,
© General methods of gas selected gases, e discuss the ways of
collection, b) prepare selected collecting and drying
e Laboratory preparation gases in the gases in the laboratory,
(oxygen, hydrogen, and laboratory, carry out activities to
nitrogen). c) describe the prepare hydrogen,
© Industrial isolation of oxygen industrial isolation nitrogen and oxygen
and nitrogen (Fractional of oxygen and gases in the laboratory,
distillation of liquid air). nitrogen from e discuss the large scale
© Physical and Chemical liquid air, (industrial)isolation of
properties d) investigate the oxygen and nitrogen
(oxygen, hydrogen, physical and from liquid air,
nitrogen), chemical properties | e use print or non print
of selected gases, media to search for
e Physical properties (odour, e) outline uses of information on
colour, effect on moist litmus selected gases, fractional distillation
paper, effect on burning f) appreciate the of liquid air,
and/or glowing wooden splint importance of © carry out experiments
and solubility in water). to investigate the
3
© Chemical properties: gases in day- to- physical properties of
- oxygen (reactions with day life. hydrogen, oxygen and
metals, carbon and nitrogen,
sulphur), © carry out activities to
- nitrogen (reactions with investigate chemical
magnesium, hydrogen and properties of oxygen,
oxygen), nitrogen and hydrogen,
- hydrogen (reactions with ¢ brainstorm on the uses
metal oxides and oxygen). of the selected gases
e Uses of oxygen, hydrogen and and their compounds.

nitrogen.

Core competencies to be developed:

« Citizenship: The learner engages effectively with others as they brainstorm on environmental effects of the industrial
waste products.

«Self-efficacy: The learner effectively communicates when describing the process of large scale(industrial) isolation of
oxygen and nitrogen from liquid air.

Values:

e Unity: The learner shows cooperation as they carry out activities to prepare and investigate the physical and chemical
properties of the selected gases.

« Respect: The learner shows patience as they brainstorm on the uses of the selected gases and their compounds.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)
Environmental conservation: The learner discusses the large-scale isolation of oxygen and nitrogen from liquid air.

4

Suggested Assessment Rubrics

a i Exceeding Expectations —_ [Meeting Expectations [Approaching Expectations [Below Expectations
Determine Accurately determines both | Correctly determines both | Determines both empirical | Correctly determines
Empirical and empirical and molecular empirical and molecular and molecular formulae empirical and molecular
Molecular formulae using logical steps | formulae. with minor errors in some | formulae with help.
Formulas and explains the reasoning calculations.

clearly.
Determine the Accurately determines Determines concentration
: Accurately determines Accurately determines
Concentration of | concentrations using ~ but explanations are
concentrations in most concentration but

Solutions formulae and techniques.

a

unclear in most steps.

cases, with explanations of | explanations are unclear in

Determine the Accurately determines Determines concentration

: Accurately determines Accurately determines
Concentration of | concentrations using ~ but explanations are
i % concentrations in most concentration but
Solutions formulae and techniques, unclear in most steps.
with detailed explanations of| cases, with explanations of | explanations are unclear in
each step. some steps.
each step.
sen see mia ae Prepare gas samples Correctly sets up apparatus | Correctly sets up
5 accurately, follow for gas preparation and apparatus and follows
accurately, following .
appropeiate metig itl appropriate methods and | follow some procedures to |_ procedures to prepare
explaining the pettetture explain the procedures. prepare gas samples. gases with assistance.
Investigate Conducts experiments to Correctly investigates most] Correctly investigates some} Attempts to explore a few
Chemical investigate all chemical chemical properties of chemical properties of chemical properties of
Properties of properties of gases and gases and explains results | gases with explanation of gases with assistance
Gases explains results in detail. in detail results. from peers.
5
STRAND 2.0: PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested
Outcomes Key Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Physical | 2.1 Salts By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: How are salts
Chemistry | ¢ Action of heat on strand, the learner © carry out activities to investigate the | important in
salts (carbonates and | should be able to: action of heat on salts, our day-to-
hydrogen carbonates, | a) investigate the e discuss the effect of thermal day life?
nitrates, and effect of heat on decomposition of salts to the
sulphates). salts, environment,
@ Solubility of salts in |b) explain the © carry out experiments to investigate
water (chlorides, solubility of salts in the solubility of different salts in
nitrates, sulphates, water, water
carbonates) c) determine the mass | perform experiments to investigate
e Solubility and of salt that the effect of temperature change on
solubility curves crystallises from a solubility of salts,
(NaCl, KNO3, KCIO3, saturated solution, «draw solubility curves and use them
CaSO, Na2COs3). d) explain the process to estimate the mass of salt that
e Fractional of preparation of crystallises when a saturated
crystallisation. insoluble salts by solution is cooled,
e complex ions precipitation e brainstorm on the industrial
e Tests for cations and reactions, applications of fractional
anions ( Pb**, Ca**, crystallisation,
Mg, Ba®* Zn?*,
6
AP*, Cu’*, Fe**, e) analyse the ions © carry out experiments to
Fe**,) and (CI, SO; present in a given demonstrate precipitation reactions,
SOs, NOx CO;*) in salt, ® practise writing stoichiometric and
solution using f) appreciate the ionic equations for precipitation
appropriate reagents. importance of salts reactions,
e Tests for any gas in day -to - day life. | © use appropriate reagents to carry out
evolved. qualitative analysis to investigate
e Flame tests (Li*, Na*, ions present in various salts,
K*, and Ca?*, Ba”). © carry out flame tests to identify

some metallic ions (Li*, Na*, K*,
and Ca®*, Ba”).

Core competencies to be developed:

e Critical thinking and problem solving: The learner develops interpretation and inferring skills as they use appropriate
reagents to analyse ions present in various salts.

¢ Learning to learn: The learner learns independently as they practise writing stoichiometric and ionic equations for
precipitation reactions.

Values:
Unity: The learner includes others as they take turns and converse while carrying out experiments with peers to demonstrate
precipitation reactions.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Safety in the laboratory: The learner develops safety skills as he/she carries out activities to investigate the action of heat on
salts.

vA
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Physical | 2.2Gas Laws |By the end of the sub| The leamer is guided to: How do gases

Chemistry |e Boyle’sand | strand, the learner should} e carry out experiments to demonstrate _| behave in different

Pee ee a cee ee SEEDS EEE TE, IE

2.0 Physical | 2.2Gas Laws |By the end of the sub| The leamer is guided to: How do gases
Chemistry |e Boyle’sand | strand, the learner should} e carry out experiments to demonstrate _| behave in different

Charles’ law. | be able to: how change of volume of a fixed mass | conditions?
le Combined a) explain the behaviour of a gas affects its pressure if the
gas law of gases under temperature is constant,
equation. different conditions of | e draw graphs showing variation of
le Graham’s temperature and volume and pressure in a fixed mass
law of pressure, of gas,
diffusion. b) apply gas laws to e discuss the behaviour of a gas at
le Gay Lussac’s determine the volume, constant temperature (Boyle’s law),
law. temperature and © carry out experiments to demonstrate
le =Avogadro’s pressure of gases, how the volume of a fixed mass of a
law. c) compare the rates of gas varies with temperature at constant
diffusion of gases at pressure,
different conditions, e draw graphs showing variation of
d) relate mole ratios to volume and temperature in a fixed
reacting volumes of mass of gas,
gases, e brainstorm on the behaviour of a gas
e) outline applications of at constant pressure (Charles’ law),
gas laws, @ practise calculations involving

Charles’ and Boyle’s law,

f) appreciate the roleof | derive combined gas law and use it to
diffusion in day-to-day perform calculations involving the
life. combined gas law,

e brainstorm on the factors affecting the
rate of diffusion of gases,

© carry out experiments to demonstrate
diffusion in liquids and gases,

© carry out experiments to determine
rate of diffusion of gases (Graham’s
Law of diffusion),

carry out calculations involving
Graham's law of diffusion,

e brainstorm on the number of particles
contained in equal volumes of
different gases (Avogadro's Law),

© carry out experiments to determine the
ratios of combining gases (Gay
Lussac’s Law),

© practise calculations involving gases
using Gay Lussac’s Law and
Avogadro's Law,

e watch simulations on the behaviour of
gases when subjected to different
conditions,

e discuss the applications of gas laws.

Core competencies to be developed:

e@ Communication and collaboration: The learner speaks clearly and effectively when contributing to group decision making
as they carry out experiments to demonstrate how change in volume of a fixed mass of a gas affects its pressure if the
temperature is constant.

¢ Digital literacy: The learner uses digital learning platforms for continuous learning and development as they watch
simulations on the behaviour of gases when subjected to different conditions.

Values:
Responsibility: The learner diligently handles equipment as they watch simulations on the behaviour of gases when subjected
to different conditions.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)
Safety and security: The learner develops safety skills as he/she discusses the industrial applications of gas laws.

10

Strand Sub Strand Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key

Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Physical | 2.3 Reaction Rates By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guided to: Why do some
Chemistry |e Collision theory and | the learner should be able to: | ¢ review kinetic theory of matter, reactions happen
activation energy. a) explain the collision e discuss the relationship between in seconds while
© Physical changes theory in chemical collision theory and rate of reaction, | others take days
that indicate the reactions, © carry out activities to illustrate or even years?
progress of a b) determine the rate of observable physical changes that
chemical reaction reactions in chemical indicate the progress of a chemical
(colour, change in processes, reaction,
mass, formation of |¢) examine the factors that |e discuss factors affecting rates of
precipitates, volume affect the rate of reaction using the collision theory,
of gas evolved, chemical reaction, © carry out experiments to investigate
change in pH, d) assess the factors that the effect of various factors on the
change in affect the position of rate of reaction,
temperature, equilibrium, use graphs to illustrate the effects of
change in ©) appreciate the role of various factors on the rate of
concentration). equilibrium in industrial chemical reactions,
e Factors affecting processes. e use the energy profile diagrams to
reaction rates explain rate of reactions with and
(concentration, without catalysts,
catalyst, surface © carry out activities to demonstrate
area, light, pressure reversible and irreversible reactions
and temperature). and write their chemical equations,
11
e Reversible reactions perform experiments to determine
(heating zinc oxide, how concentration, pressure and
candle wax, iodine, temperature affect the position of
hydrated copper (II) equilibrium in a system,
sulphate). e discuss the characteristics of
e Equilibrium. reactions in a state of dynamic
(Le Chatelier’s equilibrium,
principle). © carry out experiments to investigate
e Factors affecting how change in concentration,
chemical pressure and temperature affect a
equilibrium position dynamic equilibrium,
and yield @ use Le Chatelier’s principle to
(concentration, predict the effect of changes in
pressure, concentration, pressure and
temperature). temperature on a reaction at
e Industrial equilibrium,
applications of e discuss the applications of Le
chemical Chatelier's Principle in industrial
equilibrium (Haber, processes.
Ostwald’s and
Contact process).

Core competencies to be developed:
« Communication and collaboration: The learner develops teamwork by contributing to group decision making as they carry out
experiments to investigate factors that affect equilibrium position and yield (concentration, pressure, temperature).

12

¢ Critical thinking and problem solving: The learner develops interpretation and inferring skills as they brainstorm on how Le
Chatelier’s principle can be used to predict the effect of changes in concentration, pressure and temperature on equilibrium
reaction.

Values:
Unity: The learner exhibits equity as they share available resources amicably during experiments.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)
Financial literacy: The learner develops saving and conservation skills as they discuss applications of Le Chatelier's Principle in
industrial processes.

13

Suggested Assessment Rubric.

Level Exceeding Expectations | Meeting Expectations _ | Approaching Below Expectations
Indicator Expectations
Accurately determines | Correctly determines Determines the mass of | Determines the mass of

Determine the mass of

: the mass of salt that the mass of salt that salt that crystallises salt that crystallises
salt that crystallises " A
from a saturated crystallises from all crystallises from most | from some saturated from a saturated
soliton saturated solutions saturated solutions. solutions solution with
with clear reasoning. assistance.
Analyse for Ions Performs qualitative Correctly performs Correctly performs Performs qualitative
Present in a given salt. | analysis of all qualitative analysis of | qualitative analysis and | analysis and interprets
prescribed ions, most prescribed ions, | interprets results of results of a few ions
applying proper tests applying proper tests. | some prescribed ions. | correctly with
and interpreting results assistance.
with detailed
explanations.
Apply Gas Laws to Applies all gas laws Applies most gas laws | Applies some gas laws | Requires assistance to
Calculate Volumes, accurately, showing accurately, showing accurately, showing apply gas laws
Temperature, and detailed calculations of | detailed calculations of | calculations of either correctly, and apply
Pressure volumes, temperature, | temperature and volume, temperature or | principles involved.
and pressure. pressure. pressure.
Describe Factors Correctly describes all | Correctly describes
Affecting Reaction the factors affecting most factors affecting | Correctly describes Describes key factors
Rates reaction rates with reaction rates with some factors affecting | affecting reaction rates
clear examples and clear examples and the rate of reaction. with prompts.
reasoning. reasoning.
14

STRAND 3.0: ORGANIC CHEMISTRY

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested
Outcomes Key Inquiry
Question(s)
3.0 Organic |3.1 Hydrocarbons By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: How are
Chemistry | Occurrence of organic | strand, the learner should be | «explore occurrence of organic _| organic
compounds. able to: compounds in nature, compounds
e Fractional distillation | a) identify sources of review components of crude _| important in
of crude oil organic compounds in oil as obtained through our lives?
e Bonding in nature, fractional distillation,
hydrocarbons. b) classify hydrocarbons e discuss the classifications of
e@ Homologous series as saturated or organic compounds as
e Classification of unsaturated, saturated or unsaturated,
hydrocarbons.(Saturate |c) determine the molecular | e use the general formula of a
d and unsaturated formulae of homologous series to
hydrocarbons). hydrocarbons using the determine and write the
e@ General molecular general formula, molecular and structural
formula. d) assign names to formulae of hydrocarbons,
e@ Nomenclature of hydrocarbons and their |e illustrate isomerism in
hydrocarbons (alkanes, isomers using the hydrocarbons,
alkenes and alkynes up TUPAC rules, e name hydrocarbons and their
to 10 carbon atoms). e) prepare hydrocarbons isomers using the IUPAC
using appropriate nomenclature,
15
e Isomerism (positional methods in the e model structural and positional
and structural up to 6 laboratory, isomers of hydrocarbons,
carbon atoms). f) investigate the physical | e perform experiments to
@ Methods of preparing and chemical properties prepare methane, ethene and
hydrocarbons (alkanes, of hydrocarbons, ethyne in the laboratory,
alkenes and alkynes). | g) appreciate the © carry out activities to
e Physical properties of importance of investigate the physical
hydrocarbons (colour, hydrocarbons in our properties of alkanes, alkenes
odour, density, melting daily lives. and alkynes,
point, boiling point, © carry out experiments to
solubility). investigate the chemical
@ Chemical properties of properties of alkanes, alkenes
alkanes (cracking of and alkynes in the laboratory,
alkanes, combustion, e carry out experiments to test
substitution (consider for saturation and
methane and ethane) unsaturation,
alkenes (combustion, e brainstorm on the uses of
addition, hydrocarbons,
polymerisation and e discuss the safe disposal of
oxidation of alkenes). organic waste,

e Uses of hydrocarbons.

16

16

Core competencies to be developed:

e Creativity and imagination: The learner experiments with materials while carrying out activities to investigate the physical
properties of hydrocarbons.

e Learning to learn: The learner reflects on their own work while modelling and drawing structural formulae of isomers in
alkanes, alkenes and alkynes.

Values:

e Responsibility: The learner becomes accountable as they utilise materials to perform experiments to prepare alkanes,
alkenes and alkynes in the laboratory.

¢ Social justice: The learner works harmoniously with peers in groups while carrying out activities to investigate the
physical and chemical properties of alkanes, alkenes and alkynes in the laboratory.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)
Waste management: The learner develops skills for handling organic and inorganic waste as they discuss the safe disposal of
organic waste.

17
Suggested Assessment Rubric
Level e Meets Approaching Below
Indicator — Exceeds expectations expectations expectations expectations

Correctly determines

Correctly determines incleculae forenulaaill Determines molecular Determines molecular
Determination of | molecular formulas for t pi formulas of some formulas of hydrocarbons
Molecular all given hydrocarbons, | MOstSIveR hydrocarbons with with application of

: xy hydrocarbons, using a0 .

Formulae using appropriate 7 application of general general formulas with

fe 7 appropriate formulas and :

formulas and logic. logic formulas. assistance.

Names hydrocarbons Names hydrocarbons and :
Name . |With prompts, names

and isomers accurately, | isomers accurately, |Names some hydrocarbons}
hydrocarbons A . bs .__-_ |hydrocarbons and shows

: applying all IUPAC applying most IUPAC __|showing inconsistencies in| Yo" ees

using IUPAC , F significant inconsistencies

tules systematically and | rules systematically and applying IUPAC rules. F f
tules in applying IUPAC rules.

clearly. clearly.
Investigation of | Independently and Investigates most Investigates some Investigates physical and
physical and accurately investigates | physical and chemical __ [properties of either chemical properties with
chemical both physical and properties of physical or chemical significant guidance;
properties of chemical properties of | hydrocarbons with properties but may omit _ [limited understanding of
hydrocarbons hydrocarbons, using minimal errors in important steps or use procedures.

appropriate procedures | procedure incorrect procedures.

and materials.

18

APPENDIX: SUGGESTED RESOURCES, ASSESSMENT METHODS AND NON-FORMAL ACTIVITIES

Strands Sub Strands Suggested Resources Suggested Assessment | Suggested Non -
Methods Formal activities

Inorganic e The mole. e Conventional laboratory | e Question and answer | e Excursions.
Chemistry e Non-metals. resources. method. e Field work.

e Improvised resources. e Written exercises. e Science Clubs and

from the environment. e Individual societies.
© Digital devices. performance © Games.
e Online resources. assessment. e Science symposia.

e Observations.
© Project work.
e  Practicals.

Physical Chemistry e Salts. e Conventional laboratory | ¢ Question and answer | e Excursions.
© Gas law. resources. method. e Field work.
e Reaction e Improvised resources. e Written exercises e Science Clubs and
rates. from the environment. e Individual societies.
e Digital devices. performance e Games.
e Online resources. assessment. e Science symposia.

e Project work.
e  Practicals.

e Project work.
e Practicals.

19
Organic Chemistry | Hydrocarbons. e Conventional laboratory | ¢ Question and answer |e Excursions
resources. method. e Field work.
e Improvised resources. e Written exercises. e Science Clubs and
from the environment. e Individual societies.
e Digital devices. performance e Games.
e Online resources. assessment. e Science symposia
e Project work.
e Practicals.

20
