“Ge
KICD

KENYA INSTITUTE OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
A Skilled and@thical Society

SENIOR SCHOOL CURRICULUM DESIGN

CORE MATHEMATICS

GRADE 11

OCTOBER, 2025

First published in 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transcribed, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

ISBN: 978-9914-43-066-0

Published and printed by Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development

TABLE OF CONTENT

NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION ........:-:s:sssesssesssseeseeeesssneveseeesneseeesseeeeee
THE SENIOR SCHOOL IN THE COMPETENCY BASED CURRICULUM...
LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SENIOR SCHOOL ....... — an . . . .1V
TABLE 1: LIST OF SUBJECTS AT SENIOR SCHOOL ..
TABLE 2: LESSON DISTRIBUTION AT SENIOR SCHOOL ..
ESSENCE STATEMENT .............-..-- ioc ou
SUBJECT GENERAL LEARNING OUTCOMEG...........0.0.06:

SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS..............
STRAND 1: NUMBERS AND ALGEBRA ......
STRAND 2: MEASUREMENTS AND GEOMETRY
STRAND 3,0 STATISTICS AND PROBABILITY
STRAND 4: CALCULUS ........
APPENDIX I: SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS...
APPENDIX 2: GENERAL RESOURCES...



NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION

Education in Kenya should:

1. Foster nationalism and patriotism and promote national unity.
Kenya’s people belong to different communities, races and religions, but these differences need not divide them. They must be able to
live and interact as Kenyans. It is a paramount duty of education to help young people acquire this sense of nationhood by resolving
conflicts and promoting positive attitudes of mutual respect which enable them to live together in harmony and foster patriotism in order
to make a positive contribution to the life of the nation.

2. Promote the social, economic, technological and industrial needs for national development.

Education should prepare the youth of the country to play an effective and productive role in the life of the nation.

a) Social Needs
Education in Kenya must prepare children for changes in attitudes and relationships which are necessary for the smooth progress of a
rapidly developing modern economy. There is bound to be a silent social revolution following in the wake of rapid modernization.
Education should assist our youth to adapt to this change.

b) Economic Needs
Education in Kenya should produce citizens with the skills, knowledge, expertise and personal qualities that are required to support a
growing economy. Kenya is building up a modern and independent economy which is in need of an adequate and relevant domestic
workforce.

c) Technological and Industrial Needs
Education in Kenya should provide learners with the necessary skills and attitudes for industrial development. Kenya recognizes the
rapid industrial and technological changes taking place, especially in the developed world. We can only be part of this development
if our education system is deliberately focused on the knowledge, skills and attitudes that will prepare our young people for these
changing global trends.

3. Promote individual development and self-fulfillment
Education should provide opportunities for the fullest development of individual talents and personality. It should help children to develop
their potential interests and abilities. A vital aspect of individual development is the building of character.

4. Promote sound moral and religious values.
Education should provide for the development of knowledge, skills and attitudes that will enhance the acquisition of sound moral values
and help children to grow up into self-disciplined, self-reliant and integrated citizens.

5. Promote social equality and respot ity.
Education should promote social equality and foster a sense of social responsibility within an education system which provides equal
educational opportunities for all. It should give all children varied and challenging opportunities for collective activities and corporate
social service irrespective of gender, ability or geographical environment.

6. Promote respect for and development of Kenya’s rich and varied cultures.
Education should instil in the youth of Kenya an understanding of past and present cultures and their valid place in contemporary society.
Children should be able to blend the best of traditional values with the changing requirements that must follow rapid development in order
to build a stable and modern society.

7. Promote international consciousness and foster positive attitudes towards other nations.
Kenya is part of the international community. It is part of the complicated and interdependent network of peoples and nations. Education
should therefore lead the youth of the country to accept membership of this international community with all the obligations and
responsibilities, rights and benefits that this membership entails.

8. Promote positive attitudes towards good health and environmental protection.
Education should inculcate in young people the value of good health in order for them to avoid indulging in activities that will lead to
physical or mental ill health. It should foster positive attitudes towards environmental development and conservation. It should lead the
youth of Kenya to appreciate the need for a healthy environment.

THE SENIOR SCHOOL IN THE COMPETENCY BASED CURRICULUM

Senior School is the fourth level of Basic Education in the Competency Based Curriculum (CBC) that the learner shall proceed to after the
Pre-Primary School, Primary School and Junior School levels. The essence of Senior School is to offer learners a pre-tertiary/university/ pre-
career experience in which the learners have an opportunity to choose pathways, tracks and subjects where they shall have demonstrated
interest and/or potential at the earlier levels. Senior School comprises three years of education for leamers generally in the 16-18 years age
bracket and lays the foundation for further education and training at the tertiary level and the world of work. In the CBC vision, learners exiting
this level are expected to be engaged, empowered and ethical citizens ready to participate in the socio-economic development of the nation.

At this level, the learner shall take seven (7) learning areas as recommended by the Presidential Working Party on Educational Reforms
(PWPER, 2023). These shall comprise four compulsory learning areas namely: English, Kiswahili, Essential Mathematics/Core
Mathematics and Community Service Learning (CSL). Learners will choose between Core Mathematics (for learners pursuing the Science
Technology Engineering and Mathematics Pathway) and Essential Mathematies (for learners pursuing the non-STEM pathways). The learner
will select three learning areas depending on their career choice, aptitude, interest and personality with guidance by the Senior School career
teacher.

LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SENIOR SCHOOL

By the end of Senior School, the learner should be able to:

1. communicate effectively and utilise information and communication technology across varied contexts,
2. apply mathematical, logical and critical thinking skills for problem solving,

3. apply basic research and scientific skills to manipulate the environment and solve problems,

4. exploit individual talents for leisure, self-fulfilment, career growth, further education and training,
5. uphold national, moral and religious values and apply them in day-to-day life,

6. apply and promote health care strategies in day-to-day life,

7. protect, preserve and improve the environment for sustainability,

8. demonstrate active local and global citizenship for harmonious co-existence,

9. demonstrate appreciation of diversity in people and cultures,

10. manage pertinent and contemporary issues responsibly.


9. demonstrate appreciation of diversity in people and cultures,
10. manage pertinent and contemporary issues responsibly.

iv

TABLE 1: LIST OF SUBJECTS AT SENIOR SCHOOL

Core Subjects Arts & Sports Social Sciences Science, Technology, Engineering &
Science Mathematies (STEM)
T. English 5. Sports and 9. Literature in English 23. Biology
2. Kiswahili/KSL Recreation 10. Indigenous Languages 24. Chemistry
3. Core Mathematics/ 6. Music and Dance 11. Fasihi ya Kiswahili 25. Physics
Essential Mathematics | 7. Theatre and Film 12. Sign Language 26. General Science
4. Community Service 8. Fine Arts 13. Arabic 27. Agriculture
Learning (CSL) 14. French 28. Computer Studies
15. German 29. Home Science
16. Mandarin Chinese 30. Aviation
17. Christian Religious Education 31. Building Construction
18. Islamic Religious Education 32. Electricity
19. Hindu Religious Education 33. Metalwork
20. Business Studies 34. Power Mechanics
21. History and Citizenship 35. Woodwork
22. Geography 36. Media Technology

37. Marine and Fisheries Technology

Note:
a) Physical Education (PE) and Information Communication and Technology (ICT) will be offered to all learners to facilitate learning,
enjoyment and acquisition of life skills.
b) Every school shall offer Pastoral/Religious Programme of Instruction (P/RPI) to enhance moral, spiritual and character development
of the learners.
¢) There shall be one (1) lesson for personal or group study to deepen knowledge and enhance skills in areas of choice by the learners.
Table 2 provides guidelines on distribution of lessons at Senior School.

TABLE 2: LESSON DISTRIBUTION AT SENIOR SCHOOL
Subjects No of Lessons Per Week
(40 minutes per lesson)

Core Subjects 4
1. English 5
2. Kiswahili 5
3._ Essential Mathematics/Core Mathematics 5
4. Community Service Learning 3
Elective Subjects
5. Elective 1 5
6. Elective 2 5
7. Elective 3 5
* Physical Education 3
* ICT Skills 2
*PPI I
* Learner Personal /Group Study 7
Total Number of Lessons 40
vi
ESSENCE STATEMENT

In Senior School, Core Mathematics builds on the competencies acquired by the learner from Junior school. This Mathematics
will focus on developing learners’ critical, creative and logical reasoning as well as abstraction skills. By abstract thinking the
learner will develop the ability to identify patterns and relationships, generalize from specific samples to rules and principles that
apply to a wider range of situations, and create concepts and models that represent larger ideas.

Core Mathematics will include concepts in numbers, algebra, measurements, and in geometry; constructions, navigation, and
graphical methods. In transformations, the course will have shears, translations and stretch beyond reflection and rotation. The
Euclidian geometry is critical to understanding the phenomenon of plane and solid geometry. In addition, Statistics and Probability
are useful in research analysis, organization and presentations skills for making informed decisions. Overall, this course will enable
learners to derive laws and formulas from first principles to develop higher order thinking, creative thinking and problem solving
skills. For holistic development and wellbeing of learners Pertinent and Contemporary Issues such as Life Skills, Citizenship and
Education for Sustainable Development as well as Values are integrated into this Mathematics course for use in day to day life.

Core Mathematics will play a pivotal role in supporting other subjects particularly in Science, Technology and Engineering fields
but also in other learning areas. It will enhance the learner's skills in using mathematics effectively, efficiently and critically to
make informed decisions including the choice of projects for experiential learning that can lead to innovations and inventions.
More importantly, the subject will provide opportunities to learners to prepare for post-school options of further training in careers
such as medical fields, engineering, researchers, physicists, actuarial scientists as well as entrepreneurship.


SUE GS TEIVRIVE! LUIS, VE GMIVULIIE, EVOVGIUIINVES, PE YONVIONS, GUC IAL SUIUESLS GS WUE Gs VEE UPICNCUISIpy.

vii

SUBJECT GENERAL LEARNING OUTCOMES

By the end of the course the learner should be able to:

a) Acquire numerical computational skills, concepts and competencies for continuous learning and application of Mathematics,
b) Develop critical and creative thinking, logical reasoning, and communication skills for problem solving,

c) Use Mathematical concepts and skills to support other learning areas for further training, research and career development,
d) Build confidence and interest in Mathematics for lifelong learning,

e) Evaluate and make financial decisions and transactions in real life situations,

f) Model geometric structures in real life situations,

g) Collect, analyze and present data to inform and solve problems in real life situations,

h) Use digital technologies for Mathematical manipulations, explorations and innovations, and for further learning,

i) Appreciate the aesthetic value of Mathematics in different contexts.

vill
SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS
Strand Sub-strand
1.0 Numbers and Algebra 1.1 Quadratic Expressions and Equations

1.2 Irrational numbers

1.3 Linear Inequalities

1.4 Logarithms II

1.5 Formulae and Variations

1.6 Sequences and Series

1.7 Matrices (I)
2.0 Measurements and 2.1 Approximation and Errors
Geometry 2.2 Angle Properties of a Circle

2.3 Commercial Arithmetic

2.4 Circles, Chords and Tangents
2.5 Trigonometry (II)

2.6 Graphical Methods

3.0 Statistics and Probability 3.1 Permutations and combinations
3.2 Probability II
4.0 Calculus 4.1 Functions

4.2 Differentiation (1)

ix
STRAND 1: NUMBERS AND ALGEBRA
Sub-strand 1: Quadratic Expressions and Equations
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 1.1 Quadratic By the end of the sub-strand, | The learner is guided to: How are
Numbers | Expressions and the learner should be able to: |. ¢ work with peers to factorise | quadratic
and Equations a) identify perfect squares quadratic expressions and equations
Algebra - Perfect squares in quadratic expressions select perfect squares, applied in day
- completing squares and equations, e discuss the process of to day life?
- Quadratic formula b). solve quadratic completing squares in
- Solution of quadratic equations by completing quadratic equations,
equations using the square method, @ use completing square
quadratic formula c) derive the quadratic method to determine the

- Solution of formula using roots of quadratic equations,


~——<_ xe,

equations using the square method, @ use completing square

a we - —6lUlUlt™t~—“s—iC O™S~‘Cs<(‘ eM

quadratic formula c) derive the quadratic method to determine the
- Solution of formula using roots of quadratic equations,
simultaneous equations, completing square, e work with peers to obtain
one linear and one d) solve quadratic the quadratic formula from
quadratic by equations using the the general quadratic
substitution quadratic formula, equation,
- Application of e) solve simultaneous e discuss and interpret the
quadratic equations equations involving discriminant (b? - 4ac) ina
linear and quadratic quadratic equation,
equations, e use the quadratic formula to
find the roots of quadratic
equations,
1
f) apply quadratic e follow the steps in working
equations in real-life out simultaneous equations
situations, involving linear and
g) appreciate the quadratic equations,
application of quadratic | @ discuss ina group to form
equations in real-life and solve quadratic
situations. equations from roots and

real life situations.

Core Competencies to be developed:
e Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner follows the steps in working out simultaneous equations involving,
linear and quadratic equations.
¢@ Communication and collaboration: the learner collaborates and obtains the quadratic formula from the general quadratic
equation.

Values:
e Unity: the learner collaborates and obtains the quadratic formula from the general quadratic equation.
e Respect: the learner works with others to interpret the discriminant in a quadratic equation.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Social cohesion: the learner discusses in a group to form and solve quadratic equations in real life situations.

2
Sub-strand 2: Irrational Numbers
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Outcomes | Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested
Key Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Numbers | 1.2 Irrational By the end of the sub-strand, The learner is guided to: How are
and Algebra | numbers the learner should be able to: @ use a set of real numbers to irrational
a) identify irrational distinguish between rational numbers used
- Irrational numbers numbers in from set of and irrational numbers, in daily life?
- Simplification of real numbers, e work with peers simplify
irrational numbers | b) simplify irrational irrational numbers in form of
- Operations on numbers in different fractions and non-fractions,
irrational numbers situations, © carry out operations involving
- Rationalisation of | c) perform operations on addition, subtraction and
irrational numbers irrational numbers in multiplication of irrational
different situations, numbers,
d) rationalise irrational e work with peers generate
numbers in different conjugates of irrational
situations, numbers and use them to
e) apply irrational numbers simplify the denominator with
in different situations, irrational number,
f) reflect on the use of e solve irrational numbers from
irrational numbers in real life situations,
mathematical © use digital devices and other
computations. resources to learn more on
application of irrational
numbers in real life.
3

Core Competencies to be developed:
e Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: the learner works with others to come up with ways of simplifying irrational
numbers.
© Communication and Collaboration: the learner discusses with peers on how to identify conjugates of irrational numbers.

Values:
Unity: the learner cooperates with others as they simplify irrational numbers.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Peer Education: the learner discusses with peers how to identify conjugates of irrational numbers.



Sub-strand 3: Linear Inequalities

Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Questions
1.0 Numbers | 1.3 Linear Inequalities | By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to How are linear
and Algebra ___|- Simple and compound _| strand, the learner should —_| @ work with peers to obtain inequalities used
inequality statements be able to: inequality expressions from | in day to day
|- Linear inequality in a) solve compound compound inequality life?
two unknowns inequalities in one statements,
|- Graphical unknown, © draw graphs of compound
representation of linear |b) represent linear inequalities on a Cartesian
inequalities inequalities in two plane and shade the
|- Graphical solutions of unknowns graphically, unwanted region,
simultaneous linear c) solve the linear © use graphs to identify the
inequalities inequalities in two region satisfying the
|- Simple linear unknowns graphically, inequality statements,
inequalities from d) form simple linear e work with peers to generate
inequality graphs inequalities from the simple linear
inequality graphs, inequalities from inequality
) apply inequalities to real graphs,
life situations. e relate the inequality
f) appreciate the use of symbols to the speed limits
inequalities in real life. signs on the roads,

© use digital resources to
represent linear inequalities
graphically.

Core Competencies to be developed:

© Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner analyses compound inequalities then represent them on a number line.

¢@ Communication and collaboration: the learner collaborates with peers to draw graphs of compound inequalities on a
Cartesian plane.

Values
Responsibility: the learner follows procedures in drawing graphs of linear inequalities involving two unknowns.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)
Road safety: the learner relates the inequality symbols to the speed limits signs on the roads,

6
Sub-strand: Logarithms II
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Questions
1.0 Numbers | 1.4 Logarithms IT By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: Why are

and Algebra | -Logarithmic notation | strand, the learner should @ express a number in logarithms


Questions

1.0 Numbers | 1.4 Logarithms IT By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: Why are
and Algebra __| -Logarithmic notation | strand, the learner should @ express a number in logarithms
-The laws of be able to: logarithmic notation using important?
logarithms (addition, | a) relate index form to powers and bases,
subtraction power logarithmic notation, e@ work with peers to derive
rule and roots) b) simplify logarithmic the laws of logarithms by
-Simplification of expressions using laws relating them to the laws of
logarithmic of logarithms, indices,
expressions ¢) solve logarithmic ¢ work with peers to simplify
-Solution of equations in different logarithmic expressions
logarithmic situations, using the laws of
equations d) apply laws of logarithms,
-Applications of logarithms in different e use laws of logarithms to
logarithmic laws situations, simplify equations involving
e) explore the use of unknown indices and bases,
logarithms in real life e discuss applications of
situations. logarithms in numerical

calculations,

© use digital devices to learn
more on the applications of
laws of logarithms

Core Competencies to be developed:

¢ Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner derives the laws of logarithms by relating them to the laws of indices.

e Communication and collaboration: the learner discusses with peers the relationship between index form and logarithmic
notation.

Values:

e Unity: the learner works with others in groups to simplify logarithmic expressions.

e Respect: the learner recognises the input of every member of the group as they discuss with peers on how to simplify
logarithmic expressions using varied examples.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Social cohesion: the learner works out varied examples in groups by applying laws of logarithms.

8
Sub-strand 5: Formulae and variations
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Numbers 1.5 Formulae and | By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: How is formula
and Algebra Variations strand, the learner should be | ¢ work with peers to manipulate a | and variations
- Changing the able to: formula and change its subject, | applied in real life
subject of the a) rewrite a formula to e work out value of quantities that | situations?
formula change the subject in vary directly and inversely from
-Direct, inverse, different situations, given situations,
partial and joint |b) solve direct and inverse @ work out the constant of
variations variations from real life proportionality in a variation,
- Graphs of direct situations, e work with peers to identify
and inverse c) solve combined, joint and situations that bear joint,
variation partial variations in combined and partial variations
-Applications of different situations, such as formulas from given
variations. d) draw graphs of direct and statements,
inverse variations, e work with peers to work out
) apply variations to real value of quantities that bears
life situations, combines, joint and partial
f) appreciate the use of variations,
variations in day-to-day | @ plot the graphs from tables
life. generated from equations of
direct and inverse variations,
e work out tasks involving partial
and joint variations,
9

@ discuss applications of
variations in dav to dav life such


@ discuss applications of
variations in day to day life such
as planning activities and
events.

Core Competencies to be developed:
e Creativity and imagination: the leamer plots the graphs of direct and inverse variations.
e Critical thinking and Problem solving: the learner critically analyses a formula in order to change its subject.

Values:
Unity: the learner collaborates with peers to establish relationships between variables in variations.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Life skills and values: the learner comes up with solution involving partial and joint variations

10
Sub-strand 6: Sequence and Series
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Numbers | 1.6 Sequences and By the end of the sub- The leamer is guided to: How is
and Algebra | Series ae the learner should be | | work with peers to establish secs _
7 Num ber Sequences a) determine an nth term in a an’ Sewnel teal-life
- Arithmetic sequence number sequence, q situations?

required term for given
arithmetic or geometric

- Geometric sequence

- Arithmetic and b) determi tems and

common difference in an

reometric . 5 series,
progression arithmetic Sgquettand discuss first term and the
- Sum of: Arithmetic E) compute, the temagand common difference in an
and geometric commaiitatio in arithmetic progression and
progression geometric sequence'and use then to determine the u,
- Sum to infinity in GP. "eae © work out terms and the
- Application of 4 common ratio in a

d) determine the sum of
it je >. 5 eometric progression.
Arithmetic Oy terms in arithmetic and 8 a

i ae © work with to di
Geometric geometric Series, work with peers to derive
Progressions ©) appl¥dequetl@es and the general formula for

pry seq getting the nth term in an

i I-Life @ . 7
serieg) real ue arithmetic and geometric
situations,

progressions,
11
f) appreciate the use of @ derive the formula for the
sequences and series in sum of terms of an
real life. arithmetic and geometric,
© work out the sum of terms
for AP and GP series,

@ work out tasks involving
sequences and series,

© use digital devices to learn
more on sequences and
series.

Core Competencies to be developed:

© Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner generates a formula for the n'" term of an AP and a GP and present to
peers

e Digital literacy: the learner works with digital devices generating various sequences and series.

Values:

e Unity: the learner discusses in a group on how to determine the first term and the common difference and hence predict the
consecutive terms in a given AP.

© Respect: the learner recognises the input of every member as they discuss and work out the sum of n terms for a given AP
and GP series.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

© Road safety: list down simple number patterns, including the traffic lights intervals.

Social awareness: Effective communication- the learner communicates effectively during discussions for the determination
of the first term and common ratio and hence predict in peers the consecutive terms in a given GP.

12


Sub-strand 7: Matrices (1)

Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Outcomes | Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested
Key Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Numbers | 1.7 Matrices (I) By the end of the sub-strand, The learner is guided to: How is the
and Algebra _|-Types of matrices the learner should be able to: | @ work with peers to recognise knowledge of
(column matrix, row | a) identify types of matrices column matrix, row matrix, matrices used
matrix, square using rows and columns square matrix, rectangular in real life?
matrix, rectangular | b) determine properties of a matric, null matrix and identity
matric, null matrix matrix from rows and matrix,
and identity matrix) columns, @ discuss with peers and identify
-Properties of a ¢) perform addition and the position of elements and
matrix (elements ina subtraction of compatible order of matrices,
matrix, order of a matrices, work with peers to recognise
matrix, compatibility | 4) multiply compatible compatible matrices then carry
of two or more matrices in different out addition and subtraction of
matrices) situations, compatible matrices,
e) Compute the determinant © work out multiplication of a
of a2 by 2 matrix, matrix by a scalar and a matrix
f) determine the inverse of a 2 by a matrix,
by 2 matrix, e work out the determinant of a 2
g) solve linear equations in by 2 matrix and identify singular
two unknowns using matrix matrix,
method, © work with peers to obtain the

inverse of a2 by 2 matrix,

13
h) explore the use of @ practice solving equations
matrices in real life involving two unknowns using
situations. matrices,

e interpret real life cases, form
equations in two unknowns and
obtain solutions using matrices,

© use digital devices or other
resources to learn more on the
use of matrices in real life
situations.

Core Competencies to be developed:

Critical thinking and problem solving: As the learner interprets real life cases, forms equations involving two unknowns
and solves them using matrices.

e@ Communication and collaboration: The learner exhibits teamwork by contributing to group decision making as they
discuss and practice solving equations involving two unknowns

Values:

© Unity: as the learner cooperatively discusses with peers and identifies the elements and order of matrices

@ Respect: as the learner accepts and recognises the input of every member of the group as they work out the determinant of a
matrix and identify singular matrix.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Social cohesion: as the learner peacefully discusses in groups and practices solving equations involving two unknowns using
matrices.

14
Suggested Assessment Rubric
Level Exceeds Expectation | Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation
Expectation

Ability to identify The learner accurately | The learner accurately | The learner identifies | The learner identifies
perfect squares in identifies perfect identifies perfect perfect squares in perfect squares in
quadratic expressions | squares in quadratic squares in quadratic quadratic expressions | simple expressions or
and equations and expressions and expressions and or equations or equations
solve quadratic equations and solves equations and solves partially solves them
equations using them using the them using the using the completing
completing square completing square completing square square method
method method with varied method as expected.

examples.
Ability to derive the The learner accurately | The learner accurately | The learner derives the | The learner accurately
quadratic formula from | derives the quadratic derives the quadratic quadratic formula derives the quadratic
first principles and formula from first formula from first from first principles or | formula from first
solve quadratic principles and solves principles and solves solves quadratic principles
equations using the quadratic equations quadratic equations equations using the
formula method. using the formula using the formula formula method.

method with varied method.

examples.
Ability to identify The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner identifies | The learner identifies
irrational numbers, identifies irrational identifies irrational irrational numbers and | irrational numbers
simplify irrational numbers, simplifies numbers, simplifies simplifies basic forms,
numbers and perform | them and performs irrational numbers, and | or performs operations

operations on irrational

a


15

Level Exceeds Expectation | Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators = Expectation
operations on irrational | numbers in varied performs operations on | with irrational
numbers. contexts. irrational numbers. numbers
Ability to identify The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner identifies | The learner identifies
conjugates of irrational | identifies conjugates of | identifies conjugates of | conjugates of irrational | conjugates of irrational
numbers and irrational numbers and | irrational numbers and | numbers or rationalise | numbers
rationalise surds. expertly rationalises rationalises surds. surds, making errors in

complex surds using simplification.

examples.
Ability to solve The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner correctly
compound inequalities | solves complex solves complex solves complex solves complex
in one unknown, compound inequalities | compound inequalities | compound inequalities | compound inequalities
illustrate inequalities in one unknown, and in one unknown, and in one unknown, or in one unknown, or
onanumber line and | accurately illustrates accurately illustrates accurately illustrates accurately illustrates
on a Cartesian plane. inequalities on number | inequalities on number | inequalities on number | inequalities on number

lines and Cartesian lines and Cartesian lines and Cartesian lines.

planes with precision. _| planes . planes .
Ability to represent The learner accurately | The learner accurately | The learner represents | The learner represents
linear inequalities in represents linear represents linear linear inequalities in linear inequalities in
two unknowns inequalities in two inequalities in two two unknowns two unknowns
graphically, solve unknowns graphically, | unknowns graphically, | graphically or solves _| graphically
linear inequalities in solves linear solves linear linear inequalities in
two unknowns inequalities in two inequalities in two two unknowns
graphically and form unknowns graphically | unknowns graphically | graphically
simple linear and forms simple and forms simple

16
Level Exceeds Expectation | Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators Expectation
inequalities from linear inequalities from | linear inequalities from
inequality graphs. inequality graphs of inequality graphs.

varied scenarios.
Ability to relate the The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner relates the | The learner relates the
index form to and comprehensively _| relates the index form | index form to index form to

logarithmic notation relates the index form | to logarithmic notation | logarithmic notation or | logarithmic notation
and derive the laws of | to logarithmic notation | and derives the laws of | derives the laws of

logarithms. and derives the laws of | logarithms as expected. | logarithms.

logarithms.
Ability to simplify The learner correctly The learner correctly The leamer simplifies | The learner simplifies
logarithmic simplifies logarithmic | simplifies logarithmic | logarithmic logarithmic
expressions, expressions, solves expressions, solves expressions or solves _| expressions
solve logarithmic challenging logarithmic equations, | basic logarithmic
equations and apply logarithmic equations, | and applies laws of equations,
laws of logarithms. and applies laws of logarithms

logarithms to varied

contexts.
Ability to make a The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner makes a The learner makes a
variable subject of a and comprehensively | makes a variable the variable the subject of | variable the subject of
formula, compute makes a variable the subject of formulas and | formulas and simple formulas
direct and inverse subject of formulas. computes direct and computes either direct
variations. and computes both inverse variations or inverse variations.

direct and inverse

variations.

17
Level Exceeds Expectation | Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators Expectation
Ability to draw graphs | The learner accurately | The learner accurately | The learner accurately | The learner draws
to represent direct and | draws graphs to draws graphs to draws graphs to graphs to represent
inverse variations. represent direct and represent direct and represent direct or direct

inverse variations with | inverse variations inverse variations

precision.
Ability to work out The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner works out
partial and joint works out partial and | works out partial and | works out partial or partial or joint
variations and apply joint variations and joint variations and joint variations or variations.
variations to solve applies them to solve applies them to solve applies them to solve
equations involving equations involving equations involving equations involving
variations. variations of varied variations variations

scenarios.
Ability to identify The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner partially The learner identifies
simple number identifies simple identifies simple identifies simple simple number
patterns, determine a number patterns, number patterns, number patterns or patterns or determines
term in a number determines a term ina | determines a term ina | determines aterm ina | a term in arithmetic
sequence, the first term | sequence, the first term | sequence, the first term } sequence or the first sequences
and common and common and common term or common
difference in an difference in difference in arithmetic | difference in
arithmetic sequence. arithmetic sequences sequences arithmetic sequences

of varied cases.

Ability to determine The learner accurately | The learner accurately | The learner determines | The learner determines
the first term and determines the first determines the first the first term or the first term in


of varied cases.

Ability to determine The learner accurately | The learner accurately | The learner determines | The learner determines

the first term and determines the first determines the first the first term or the first term in

term and common ratio geometric sequences

18
Level Exceeds Expectation | Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators Expectation
common ratio ina in geometric sequences | term and common ratio | common ratio in
geometric sequence. of varied cases. in geometric sequences | geometric sequences
Ability to derive the The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner partially The learner derives the
formula for the sum of | derives the formula for | derives the formula for | derives the formula for | formula for the sum of
n terms of an the sum of nterms of | the sum of'n terms of | the sumofn terms of | n terms of an
arithmetic and an arithmetic and an arithmetic and an arithmetic or arithmetic series
geometric series and geometric series and geometric series and geometric series
apply the knowledge apply the knowledge apply the knowledge of
of sequences and of sequences and series | sequences and series
series. in various cases.
Ability to determine The learner correctly | The learner correctly The learner partially The learner determines
the properties of a determines the determines the determines the the properties of a
matrix, carry out properties of a properties of a properties of a matrix, carry out
addition, subtraction matrix, carries out matrix, carries out matrix, carries out addition
and multiplication of —_| addition, subtraction addition, subtraction addition, subtraction or
matrices. and multiplication of _ | and multiplication of multiplication of

matrices using matrices matrices

examples.
Ability to determine The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner determines | The learner determines
the determinant of a2 | and comprehensively | determines the the determinant of a2 | the determinant of a2
by 2 matrix, determine | determines the determinant of a2 by2 | by 2 matrix or the by 2 matrix,
the inverse of a2 by 2 | determinant of a2 by 2 | matrix, determines the | inverse of a2 by 2
matrix and solve matrix, determines the _| inverse of a 2 by 2 matrix

19
Level Exceeds Expectation | Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators __— Expectation
equations with two inverse of a 2 by 2 matrix and solve
unknowns using matrix and solve equations with two
matrix method. equations with two unknowns using matrix

unknowns using method

matrix method.

20
STRAND 2: MEASUREMENTS AND GEOMETRY
Sub-strand 1: Approximation and Errors
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Measurements | 2.1Approximation | By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: Why are
and Geometry and Errors strand the learner should © estimate measurement of quantities
- Estimation and be able to: quantities and compare with | approximated?
approximations a) determine errors from the actual values,
- Absolute, Relative measurements of © work with peers to calculate
and Percentage quantities, absolute, relative and
errors b) determine absolute, percentage errors using the
- Round off Telative and percentage estimates and actual
(significant figures errors from measurements,
decimal places) measurements, e work out the absolute errors
- Truncation errors |c) compute round off and resulting from rounding off
- Propagation of truncation errors from numbers to a given decimal
errors measurements, places and significant

d) determine maximum and figures,
minimum errors from © work with peers to truncate


errors measurements, places and significant
d) determine maximum and figures,

minimum errors from © work with peers to truncate
limits in measurements, numbers to a given

e) perform propagation of significant figures and
errors using limits of decimal places working out
measurements, errors associated with them,

f) appreciate the use of
approximations and

21

errors in real life @ work out the maximum and
situations. minimum errors from real
life situations,
© use limits to carry out
propagation of errors
involving addition,
subtraction, multiplication
and division of quantities,
© discuss effects of
approximations and errors
when planning for a journey
to enhance road safety on
the road during the journey.

Core Competencies to be developed:

e Communication and collaboration: the learner discusses effects of approximations and errors when planning for a journey
to enhance road safety.

e Digital literacy: the learner uses digital devices such as calculators to propagate errors.

Values:
¢ Responsibility: the learner takes accurate measurements and makes estimations and approximations.
Integrity: the learner works in a group to report the correct measurements and give correct approximations.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
@ Promoting Social Cohesion: the learner collaborates in group activities to estimate and approximate errors in different
situations.
e Road safety: the learner discusses effects of approximations and errors when planning for a journey to enhance road safety.

22
Sub-strand 2: Angle Properties of a Circle
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested
Outcomes Key Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Measurements | 2.2 Angle By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: How is the
and Geometry Properties of a strand the learner should Je use circular shapes or objects to | knowledge of
Circle be able to: recognise ares, chords, and angle
- Arc, chord and a) identify an arc, chord, segments of a circle, properties of a
segment and segment in a le model circle, mark an arcon _| circle used in
- Angle subtended circle, the circumference of the circle. | day to day
by the same arc b) relate angles Use the arc to subtend different | life?
- Angle subtended subtended by the same angles at the circumference of
by the same chord are at the the circle then compare the
- Angles ina circumference, angles,
semicircle c) relate the angle je ~=Use a model of a circle, subtend
- Cyelic subtended by an arc at an angle at the centre and at the
quadrilateral the centre and at the circumference, measure the
circumference, angles and compare them,
d) determine angles le ~Work with peers to use a chord
subtended by a chord to subtend angles at the centre
and a diameter at the and at the circumference in the
circumference, same segment to establish the
e) determine angles ina relationship,

cyclic quadrilateral, | subtend angles from the
diameter to the circumference

23
f) apply the angle in both segments, measure the
properties of a circle angles and draw conclusions,
in different situations, |e inscribe a quadrilateral into a
g) reflect on the use of. circle, establish the relationship
angle properties of a of the angles in the
circle in different quadrilateral,
situations. le use digital devices and other

resources to learn more on
angle properties of a circle,

le discuss the safety precautions
taken when using construction
instruments.

Core Competencies to be developed:
¢ Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: the learner collaborates with peers to use circular shapes or objects to recognise
ares, chords, and segments of a circle.


Core Competencies to be developed:

¢ Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: the learner collaborates with peers to use circular shapes or objects to recognise
ares, chords, and segments of a circle.

¢ Digital literacy: the learner uses digital devices and other resources to learn more on angle properties of a circle.

Values:

@ Unity: the learner collaborates with peers to use circular shapes or objects to recognize arcs, chords, and segments of a
circle.

@ Respect: the learner collaborates with peers to draw a chord, subtend angles at the circumference, measure the angles and
establish the relationship.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Safety: the learner discusses the safety precautions taken when using construction instruments.

24
Sub-strand 3: Commercial Arithmetic
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 2.3 Commercial __| By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: Why is
Measurements | Arithmetic strand the learner should |e work out with peers to work out commercial
and Geometry Simple li be able to: simple interest charged on goods arithmetic
- a e aia tesimpl period of time, important in
en aoe a) ‘ater a Wy ai e use the step by step method to our day to day
interest . interest Tene generate the compound interest transactions?
- Appreciation simple interest formula.
7 Dep vreciation formula, use compound interest formula to
- Hire purchase b) derive compound compute interest and a mount
(to include rate interest formula charged at annual and semi-annual
of ines: pen int tid by “Je use digital devices and other
carrying Case step method, resources to calculate compound
instalments. ¢) determine interest
- Income tax compound interest r

work with peers identify items
whose values appreciate to work
out the appreciation,

work with peers identify items
whose values depreciate and work
out the depreciation,

using the compound
interest formula,

d) determine the value
of appreciation and
depreciation of
assets,

25

©) determine the cost of Je discuss the meaning of carrying

goods in hire charge, monthly instalment and
purchase, deposit as used in hire purchase,
f) compute income tax |@ calculate the cost of items and the
using taxation table, rate of interest charged on goods
g) apply commercial bought on hire purchase,
arithmetic concepts |e discuss the meaning of gross
in day to day life, income, taxable income, tax reliefs,
h) appreciate the use of PAYE and net income then
commercial calculate income tax using taxation
arithmetic in real- table,
life situations. discuss with peers the importance

of paying taxes to the government,
e use digital devices to learn more on
commercial arithmetic.

Core Competencies to be developed:
e Digital literacy: the learner uses digital devices and other resources to calculate income tax in real life situations.
e Citizenship: the learner discusses with peers the importance of paying taxes to the government.

Values:
e Patriotism: the learner discusses with peers the importance of paying taxes to the government.
e Unity: the learner uses the step by step method to generate the compound interest formula.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

@ Good governance and integrity: the learner appreciates the concept of calculation of income tax a

© Social-economic and environmental issues :Financial Literacy: the learner calculates the value of items as they appreciate
and depreciate using the compound interest formula.

26
Sub-strand 4: Circles, chords and tangents
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)

2.0 Measurements | 2.4 Circles, By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: How is the

and Geometry Chords and strand the learner should e model circles using items such | knowledge of
Tangents be able to: as wires and use the circle to tangents useful

- chords and a) determine the length of work out lengths of day to day life?

tangents intersecting chords and intersecting chords and a

~~ Lanothe af tancent tna.circla tanoent


be able to: as wires and use the circle to | tangents userul

- chords and a) determine the length of work out lengths of day to day life?
tangents intersecting chords and intersecting chords and a

- Lengths of tangent to a circle, tangent,
tangents and b) construct a tangent toa |e collaborate with peers to
intersecting circle at a given point, deduce the properties of a
chords ¢) construct direct and chord and a tangent from

- Properties of transverse common construction,
chords and tangents to two circles, |@ work with peers to work out
tangents d) determine the the lengths of intersecting

- Construction of relationship of angles in chord and tangents,
tangents toa the alternate segment, |¢ work with peers to draw a
circle e) construct an inscribed, tangent to a circle at a given

- Direct and circumscribed and point using geometrical
transverse escribed circles on a instruments,
common triangle, e wok with peers to draw a
tangents to two | f) determine the centroid direct common tangent to two
circles and orthocentre of a circles,

triangle,
27

- Angles in g) apply angles chords and |e work with peers to draw a
alternate tangents to real life transverse common tangent to
segment situations, two circles,

- Contact of h) appreciate the use of @ deduce relationship of angles
Circles circles, chords and in alternate segments using

- Circumscribed, tangents in real life drawings and models,
inscribed and situations. ¢ draw triangles and bisect the
escribed circles sides to identify the

- Centroid and circumcentre, and hence draw
orthocentre the circumcircle,

e draw a triangle and bisect the
interior angles to identify the
in-centre and hence draw the
inscribed circle,

¢ draw a triangle and bisect
two exterior angles to
identify the ex-centre and
hence draw the escribed
circle and compare with
peers,

e locate the centroid and
orthocentre of a triangle,

@ discuss the applications of
angles, chords and tangents
in situations such as pulley
belts,

28

© apply digital resources to
construct chords and
tangents to a circle.

Core Competencies to be developed:
e Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: learner draws a transverse common tangent to two circles
e Learning to learn: the learner collaborates to deduce the relationship of angles in alternate segments

Values:
e Unity: the learner collaborates to deduce the relationship of angles in alternate segments.
Respect: the learner shares in peers a triangle and bisect two exterior angles to identify the ex-centre and hence draw the
escribed circle.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
e Social cohesion: as the learner collaborates to deduce relationship of angles in alternate segments
e Safety: as the learner handles sharp geometrical instruments to construct the tangents

29
Sub-strand 5: Trigonometry (II)
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning | Suggested Learning | Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Measurements {2.5 Trigonometry | By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: why is the -



Outcomes 7 Experiences Inquiry

Question(s)
2.0 Measurements 2.5 Trigonometry | By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: why is the
and Geometry ap strand the learner should be }e work with peers to draw a unit | knowledge of
able to: circle and use it to obtain trigonometry
~ Unit circle a) determine trigonometric | trigonometric ratios, important?
- Trigonometric ratios of angles usinga |@ work out the trigonometric
ratios from unit unit circle, ratios of angles greater than
circle b) determine trigonometric 90° from the unit circle,
- Angles greater ratios of angles greater | work out trigonometric ratios
than 90°, than 90° in different of negative angles from the
negative angles situations, unit circle,
- Radian c) determine trigonometric |@ collaborate with peers to work
measure ratios of negative angles out trigonometric equations
- Conversion of in different situations, involving single trigonometric
degrees 10 d) solve trigonometric ratios in the range 0° to 360°
radiaf@and equations involving le collaborate with peers to
viceversl trigonometric ratios the convert angles from degrees to
h range 0° to 360°, the radian,
~ Graphs of (sin e) convert angles from @ discuss with peers to convert
%, cos x, fan x) degrees to radians and angles from radians to degrees,
360"<x<360" vice versa in different |e generate tables of values for
situations, trigonometric functions using
30
- Deriving sine f) draw graphs of calculators or mathematical
and cosine trigonometric functions tables,
rules in degrees and radians, |e plot graphs of trigonometric
- Trigonometric | 8) derive sine and cosine functions using a suitable
solution of rules using triangles, scale,
triangles, h) solve triangles using le work with peers to derive sine
- Application of | . the sine and cosine rule and cosine rules from
Sinoand i) appreciate use of triangles, :
- trigonometry in real ie work out sides and angles in a
Cosine Rules life situati jangle usin i aces
jife situations. triang| le using sine and cosine
tules,

je use digital devices to draw
graphs of trigonometric
functions.

Core Competencies to be developed:
© Communication and Collaboration: the learner collaborates with peers to convert angles from degrees to the radian.
© Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner works with peers to derive sine and cosine rules from triangles

Values

¢ Responsibility: the learner takes care of the education resources used in trigonometry such mathematical tables and
calculators.

e Respect: the learner accommodates the views of group members during the discussion with peers to convert angles from
radians to degrees.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Socio-economic and environmental issues: the learner exhibits environmental conservation by using locally available
resources to make a chart of the unit circle.

31
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested
Outcomes Experiences Key Inquiry
Question
2.0 Measurements | 2.6 Graphical Methods | By the end of the sub- The learner is guided to: How are
and Geometry ; strand, the learner should | ¢ draw graphs of quadratic _| relations
+ Grap 4 of quadratic be able to: and cubic equations and presented in
equations a) solve quadratic and determine their roots, real life?
~ Graphical solution o cubic equations e draw graphs of linear and
smuslianecHs equation graphically, quadratic equations and
By One: linear and one b) solve determine the roots,
quadratic , simultaneous equations | ¢ work out average rate of
~ Graphs of cubic ofa linear and a change from graphical
antes fe quadratic and cubic representation of
~ Average rate ofcchange equations graphically, equations,
- Rate of change at an c) determine average rate | e discuss with peers then
. prone Gataged of change and average work out instantaneous
th P! Sh rate of change at an rate of change from
hie <td instant from a graph, graphs,
~ Line of best fit d) draw graphs of © collaborate with peers to
7 ReductioM@as on empirical data and plot empirical data and
linear to linear » line of best fit in draw line of best fit,
~ Equation ofa je different situations, | ¢ work with peers to
7 Conic curves e) convert nonlinear convert a given nonlinear
- circle equation to linear relation to linear,
- parabola

32



form in different e work with peers to

situations, determine constants in
f) determine constants in non-linear relations using
nonlinear equations in graphs of linear relations,
different situations, work out the coordinates
g) determine the centre, of the centre of a circle
radius and equation of and its radius from an
a circle in different equation,
situations, le work out the equation of
h) draw graphs of circles the circle using
and parabolas in coordinates of the centre,
different situations, je generate tables of values
i) promote the use of from equations of circles
graphical solutions to and parabolas,
day to day life. je use digital resources to
draw graphs of different
relations.

Core Competencies to be developed:
je Digital literacy: the learner uses digital resources to draw graphs of different relations.
le Self-Efficacy: the learner clearly describes the procedure defined in drawing graphs of linear and quadratic equations.

Values:
¢ Responsibility: the learner cares for own drawing resources and those of others while plotting points and drawing graphs.
Integrity: the learner individually draws graphs of given relations from a table of values and gives honest results.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Effective communication: the learner discusses with others to work out an instantaneous rate of change from graphs.

33
Suggested Assessment Rubric
Levels Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators Expectation
Ability to determine | The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner partially | The learner
absolute, relative and | determines absolute, determines absolute, determines absolute, | determines absolute,
percentage errors relative and percentage relative and percentage | relative and from measurements
from measurements. | errors from measurements | errors from percentage errors from

in varied contexts. measurements measurements
Ability to compute The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner partially | The learner computes
round off and computes round-off and computes round-off computes round-off or | round-off errors
truncation errors. truncation errors, of and truncation errors truncation errors

various contexts.
Ability to calculate The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner partially | The learner calculates
maximum and calculates maximum and calculates maximum calculates maximum | maximum errors
minimum errors from | minimum errors from and minimum errors or minimum errors from measurements
measurements and measurements and from measurements from measurements
computations. computations from various | and computations

cases.
Ability to identify an | The learner correctly The learner correctly | The learner identifies | The learner arc or
arc, chord and identifies arcs, chords, and | identifies ares, chords, | arcs, chords, or chord of a circle
segment of a circle segments of a circle and and segments of a segments of a circle
and relate angle comprehensively relates circle and relates the
subtended by the are | the angle subtended by the | angle subtended by the
at the circumference. | arc at the circumference. arc at the

circumference.
34
Levels Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators Expectation
Ability to relate angle | The learner accurately and | The learner accurately | The learner partially | The learner relates
subtended by the comprehensively relates relates the angle relates the angle the angle subtended
same arc at the centre | the angle subtended by the | subtended by the same. | subtended by the same | by the same are at
and at the same are at centre and arc at the centre and arc at centre or centre or
circumference and circumference and circumference and circumference or circumference of a
determine the angles | determines angles determines angles determines angles circle.
subtended by a chord | subtended by chords and subtended by chords subtended by chords
and a diameter at the | diameters at the and diameters at the and diameters at the
circumference of a circumference of a circle. | circumference of a circumference of a
circle. circle. circle.
Ability to determine | The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner partially | The learner
angles in a cyclic determines angles ina determines angles ina | determines angles ina | determines angles in
quadrilateral and cyclic quadrilateral and cyclic quadrilateral cyclic quadrilateral or | a cyclic quadrilateral
apply the angle applies angle properties of | and applies angle applies angle
properties of a circle. | circles using examples. properties of circles properties of circles
Ability to calculate The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner calculates | The learner calculates
simple interest, calculates simple interest, | calculates simple simple interest or simple interest.
derive compound derives the compound interest, derives the derives the compound
interest formula and | interest formula and compound interest interest formula or
compute compound —_| computes compound formula and computes | computes compound
interest using the interest using varied compound interest interest
compound interest examples.

formula.

35


Levels Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators Expectation
Ability to determine | The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner partially | The learner
the value of determines appreciation determines determines determines
appreciation and and depreciation values of | appreciation and appreciation or appreciation values
depreciation of assets using relevant depreciation values of | depreciation values of | of assets
assets. examples. assets assets
Ability to determine | The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner partially The learner
the cost of goods in determines hire purchase determines hire determines hire determines hire
hire purchase and costs and computes income | purchase costs and purchase costs or purchase costs.
compute income tax _| tax using taxation tables, computes income tax computes income tax
using taxation tables. | using varied scenarios. using taxation tables.__| using taxation tables.
Ability to prepare a The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner prepares | The learner prepares
single and two prepares single and two- prepares single and. single or two-column_ | single column cash
column cash books. | column cash books of two-column cash cash books books
varied transactions. books
Ability to determine | The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner partially The learner
the length of determines lengths of determines lengths of | determines lengths of | determines lengths of
intersecting chords intersecting chords and intersecting chords and | intersecting chords or | intersecting chords
and tangent to a circle | tangents to a circle and tangents to a circle and | tangents to a circle or
and construct a constructs precise tangents | constructs a tangent to | constructs a tangent to
tangent to a circle. with precision. acircle. a circle.
Ability to construct The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner constructs | The learner
direct and transverse | constructs direct and constructs direct and direct or transverse constructs direct
transverse common common tangents to
36

Levels Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation
Indicators Expectation
common tangents to | tangents to two circles with | transverse common common tangents to two circles
two circles. precision. tangents to two circles_| two circles
Ability to construct The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner constructs | The learner
inscribed, constructs inscribed, constructs inscribed, any 2 of; inscribed or | constructs any | of;
circumscribed and circumscribed and escribed | circumscribed and circumscribed or inscribed or
escribed circles ofa _| circles of a triangle with escribed circles of a escribed circles of a circumscribed or
triangle. precision. triangle triangle escribed circles of a

triangle
Ability to determine | The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner The learner
the centroid and determines the centroid and | determines the determines either the | determines the
orthocentre of a orthocentre of a triangle centroid and centroid or centroid of a triangle
triangle. with precision orthocentre of a orthocentre of a
triangle triangle
Ability to determine | The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner The learner
trigonometric ratios _| determines trigonometric determines determines accurately determines
of angles greater than | ratios for angles greater trigonometric ratios trigonometric ratios trigonometric ratios
90° and negative than 90° and negative for angles greater than | for angles greater than | for angles greater
angles from the unit | angles from the unit circle | 90° and negative 90° or negative angles | than 90° from the
circle. using examples. angles from the unit from the unit circle unit circle
circle
Ability to convert The learner correctly The learner correctly The learner converts The learner converts
angles from degrees | converts angles from converts angles from angles from degrees to | angles from degrees
to radians and vice degrees to radians and vice | degrees to radians and | radians or vice versa to radians or vice
versa, versa and draws graphs of _| vice versa and draws or draws graphs of versa
37

Levels Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation
Indicators Expectation
and draw graphs of trigonometric functions in | graphs of trigonometric
trigonometric degrees and radians. trigonometric functions in degrees
functions in degrees for various angles. functions in degrees and radians
and radians. and radians

Ability to derive sine | The learner correctly and The learner correctly The learner correctly | The learner derives
and cosine rules from | systematically derives sine | derives sine and cosine | derives sine or cosine | sine or cosine rules

first principles using | and cosine rules from first | rules from first tules from first from first principles
triangles and solve principles using triangles __ | principles using principles using using triangles
triangles using sine and solves triangles using _| triangles and solves triangles or solves
and cosine rules. sine and cosine rules. triangles using sine triangles using sine

and cosine rules and cosine rules
Ability to determine | The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner The learner
trigonometric ratios | determines trigonometric _| determines determines determines
of angles from unit ratios of angles from the trigonometric ratios of | trigonometric ratios trigonometric ratios
circle, angles greater | unit circle, angles greater angles from the unit for angles from the for angles from the
than 90° and negative | than 90° and negative circle, angles greater unit circle and angles | unit circle.
angles. angles in various scenarios | than 90° and negative | greater than 90°

angles.
Ability to draw The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner draws The learner partially
graphs of draws graphs of draws graphs of graphs of draws graphs of
trigonometric trigonometric functions in | trigonometric trigonometric trigonometric
functions in degrees | degrees and radians, using | functions in degrees functions in degrees or | functions in degrees
and radians, examples. and radians radians

38


38

STRAND 3,0 STATISTICS AND PROBABILITY
Sub-strand 1: Permutation and Combinations

Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Outcomes | Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
3.0 Statistics 3.1 Permutations | By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guided to: 1. How are
and and the learner should be able to: | @ work with peers to explore permutations
Probability combinations a) express a natural number and express natural numbers used in day-to-
in factorial notation, in factorial notation day life?
- Factorial b) perform permutations e discuss life situations 2. Where is
notation involving real life involving permutations, combination
- Permutations situations, e work out permutations using used in day-to-
- Combinations c) perform combinations Teal life cases, day life?
- Application of involving teal life e. discuss real life situation .
permutations situations, involving combinations,
and d) apply permutations and © use different objects to come
combina? combinations to real life up with different
situations, combinations then work out
e) explore the use of combinations based in real
permutations and life situations,
combinations in real life | work with peers to research
situations. the application of

permutations and
combinations in real life
situations.

39

Core Competencies to be developed:
e Critical thinking and problem-solving: the learner works out the number of combinations based on real life situations,
e Learning to learn: the learner carries out research on application of permutations and combination in real life situations

Values:
Unity: the learner works with peers to explore and express the factorial of a natural number, n!

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Integrity: the learner applies laid down procedure in carrying out research on application of permutation and combination in real
life situations.

40
Sub-strand 2: Probability
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
3.0 Statistics 3.2 Probability II | By the end of the sub-strand | The learner is guided to: How is the
and Probability the learner should be able to: | ¢ discuss with peers the real-life knowledge of
(8 lessons) a) determine theoretical situations where theoretical probability
7 Theoretical probability in different probability occurs, important?
2 robability situations, e work with peers to differentiate
~ Discrete and b) determine discrete and between discrete and continuous
ane continuous probabilities probability in daily life,
probability in different situations, e work with peers to work out
~ Laws of i c) apply laws of probability discrete and continuous
probability to predict likelihood of probabilities,
. Combined events, e discuss applications of the laws
even: ) determine probability of of probability,
mutual mutually exclusive and e work with peers to compute
excluste independent events, tasks involving mutually
~ indepetijgnt e) calculate probabilities exclusive events and
svews using tree diagrams, independent events
= Tree diagrams f) appreciate the application | ¢ discuss in a group, situations
of probability in day-to- where laws of probability are

day life. used to determine probabilities


~ Aree dagrams f) appreciate the application | ¢ discuss in a group, situations

of probability in day-to- where laws of probability are
day life. used to determine probabilities
of independent events,

41

e work with peers to use tree
diagram to work out
probabilities of combined events,

¢ use digital devices and other
Tesources to research more on
applications of probability in real
life situations.

Core Competencies to be developed:

¢ Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner working with peers draws and uses tree diagrams to work out
probabilities of combined events.

¢ Communication and collaboration: -Teamwork: the learner collaborates with peers to compute tasks involving
independent events.

e Digital literacy: the learner uses digital devices and other resources to research more on applications of probability.

Values:

© Social Justice: - Equity: the learner fosters fairness during group discussions involving situations where laws of probability
are used to determine probabilities of independent events.

e Responsibility: - Accountability: the learner engages in assigned roles when carrying out experiments involving real life
situations to deduce conditional probability.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):

e Financial literacy: the learner discusses in a group situation where laws of probability are used to determine probabilities
of independent events such as weather forecast, football leagues, and elections.

e Road safety: the learner discusses situations where laws of probability are applied to determine mutually exclusive events
such as choices of safe means of road transport.

42

Suggested Assessment Rubric: Permutation and Combinations

evels Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation
Indicators Expectation
Ability to determine The leamer accurately The learner accurately The learner determines | The learner
the factorials of determines the factorials | determines the factorials | the factorials of natural | determines the
natural numbers, of natural numbers and of natural numbers and | numbers or performs factorials of natural
perform permutations | performs permutations performs permutations | permutations or numbers
and combinations. and combinations of and combinations combinations

varied scenarios.

Ability to compute The learner accurately The learner accurately The learner computes The learner
theoretical computes theoretical computes theoretical any 2 of, theoretical computes any | of;
probability, discrete probability, discrete and probability, discret probability, discrete theoretical, discrete

and continuous continuous probabilities continuous probabi and continuous

probabilities. of varied scenarios probabilities probabilities

Ability to apply laws | The learner accurately The learner accurately The learner applies any | The learner applies
of probability to and comprehensively applies laws of 2 laws of probability to | any | law of

predict likelihood of | applies laws of probability to predict predict likelihood of probability to predict
events. probability to predict likelihood of events events likelihood of events

likelihood of events in
varied situations.

Ability to determine The learner accurately The learner accurately The learner determines | The learner
the probability of determines probabilities determines probabilities | probabilities of determines
combined events and | of combined events and of combined events and | combined events or probabilities of
calculate probabilities | calculates probabilities calculates probabilities | calculates probabilities | combined events
using tree diagrams. | using tree diagrams of using tree diagrams using tree diagrams
varied scenarios.
43
STRAND 4: CALCULUS
Sub-strand 1: Functions of a single variable
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Outcomes | Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested Key
Inquiry
Question(s)
4.0 Calculus | 4.1 Functions By the end of the sub-strand The learner is guided to: How are
the learner should be able to: e use illustrations to identify functions
(8 lessons) a) identify relations and the relations and the different applied in daily
-Domain and different types of mappings types of mappings, life?
Range b) identify functions and their | ¢ work with peers to brainstorm
-Function properties, on the meaning of function,
notation c) determine the range and domain and range,
-Type of domain of functions, work with peers to identify a
functions d) compute the value of a domain and range of
- Algebraic function in different functions,
functions only situations, e work with peers to obtain the

(polynomials, e) determine the inverse of a value of a function using
_ rt fmractiian at aniumnamialca eamnle relathanc


- Algebraic function In different functions,

functions only situations, e work with peers to obtain the
(polynomials, e) determine the inverse of a value of a function using
rational) function of polynomials simple relations,
-Inverse and trigonometric ratios, e discuss the inverse of numbers
functions f) evaluate limits of and fractions and relate them
-Limits of polynomial functions in to inverse of functions,
polynomials different situations e work out the inverse of
-Evaluation of g) apply functions to real life function equations of
functions situations, polynomials and trigonometric
ratios,
44
h) appreciate the use of ¢ work with peers to obtain
functions in real life limits of polynomials,
situations. ¢ discuss the uses of functions
and limits in mathematics
computations,

© use digital devices to learn
more on applications of
functions.

Core Competencies to be developed:
e Communication and collaboration: the learners collaborate with peers to work out the inverse of functions.
© Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner works with peers to brainstorm on the meaning of function, domain and
range.

Values:
e Respect: the learner accepts diverse opinions as she/he discusses in a group and with illustrations identifies the different
types of mappings.
¢ Unity: the learner cooperates and collaborates with peers to work out the inverse of functions.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Social Cohesion- the learner collaborates with peers to work out the inverse of functions.

45
Sub-strand 2: Differentiation
Strand Sub-strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
4.0 Calculus | 4.2 Differentiation (I) By the end of the sub-strand | The learner is guided to: How is
the learner should be able work with peers to discuss | differentiation
(10 lessons) to: how to find the gradient of | applied in real
~ Average and a) compute average and a straight line, life?
Instantaneous rate of instantancous rates of © collaborate with peers to
change change in different draw a tangent to a curve,
- Gradient of a curve at situations, @ use the gradient of a
a point b) calculate the gradient a tangent to a curve to work
- Gradient of y= xn curve at point, out the average and
(where n is a positive |c) relate the delta notation instantaneous rate of
integer) to rate of change in change,
- First Principles of curve, e link delta notation to the
Derivatives. d) determine the rate of change at small
- Equations of derivatives of ; intervals, , .
gradients and normal polynomial functions, e@ work out tasks involving
- Application of e) determine the equations equations of tangents and
pp!
derhuntves to of tangents and normal normal to a curve,
7 to a curve, e work with peers to deduce
Kinematics. (maxima f) apply derivatives to the gradient function of
and minima not kinematics in different curves,
situations,
46
required at this g) appreciate the use of e work with peers to calculate
grade) differentiation in real the derivatives of functions
life. using the first principle,

e work with peers to obtain
velocity, displacement and
time from the equations
relating to motions,

e use digital devices and
other resources to learn
more on differentiation.

Core Competencies to be developed:
e Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner deduces the gradient function of a curve
e Digital literacy: the learner uses digital devices and other resources to learn more on differentiation

Values:


OS Sp ees WS ae eeepee
e Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner deduces the gradient function of a curve
e Digital literacy: the learner uses digital devices and other resources to learn more on differentiation

Values:
Unity: the learner works with peers to calculate the derivatives of functions using the first principle.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs
social cohesion: the learner works with peers to find gradient functions

47

Suggested Assessment Rubric: Functions and Limits
Levels | Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicators ——~ Expectation
Ability to identify | The learner accurately and | The learner accurately | The learner identifies any | The learner
relations, types of | comprehensively identifies | identifies relations, 2 of; relations, types of | identifies any | of;
mappings, relations, types of types of mappings, mappings, functions or relations, types of
functions and their | mappings, functions and functions and their their properties. mappings or
properties, their properties. properties. functions.
Ability to The learner accurately and | The learner accurately | The learner determines The learner
determine the comprehensively determines the range, | any 3 of; the range, determines any 2 of;
range, domain determines the range, domain, value, inverse | domain, value, inverse the range, domain,
value, inverse and | domain, value, inverse and | and limits of functions. | and limits of functions. value, inverse and
limits of functions. | limits of functions. limits of functions.
Ability to The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner determines The learner
determine average | determines average and determines average any 3 of; average or determines any 2 of;
and instantaneous _| instantaneous rates of and instantaneous rates | instantaneous rates of average or
rates, gradient ofa | change, gradients of of change, gradients of | change or gradients of instantaneous rates
curve and relate the | curves and relates delta curves and relates curves or relates delta of change or
delta notation to notation to rates of change | delta notation to rates | notation to rates of gradients of curves,
rate of change ina | in varied scenarios. of change change
curve.
Ability to The learner accurately The learner accurately | The learner determines The learner
determine the determines derivatives of _| determines derivatives | any 2 of; derivatives of determines any |

48
derivatives of functions, equations of of functions, equations | functions or equations of, derivatives of
functions, tangents and normal to a of tangents and normal _| of tangents or normal to functions or
equations of curve using varied toa curve. acurve. equations of
tangents and examples. tangents to a
normal to a curve. curve.

49

APPENDIX 1: SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS

Strand Sub-strand Suggested Learning Suggested Suggested Non-
Resources Assessment Formal Activities
Methods
1 | Numbers and | Quadratic Expressions e Calculators Project Clubs and
Algebra and Equations written test societies
Oral and written Field trips
Irrational numbers e Calculator .

> ae ea Ce



Numbers and | Quadratic Expressions e Calculators Project Clubs and

Algebra and Equations written test societies
Irrational D Caleul Oral and written Field trips
rational numbers e Calculator quizzes Mathematics
: — Peer assessments Symposiums

Linear Inequalities ¢ Graphs — Oral questions Science and

¢ Geometrical set Check list Engineering Fair

_ e calculator Journals Mathematics club

Logarithms II © calculator Practical work

@ mathematical table Observation

Formulae and Variations e Grid boards
e@ Geometrical equipment
e Graph paper
Stop watch
e Calculator
e@ Ruler or tape measure
Sequences and Series @ Objects on different
sizes
© Strings
@ Measuring instruments
e@ Stop watch

50

Matrices (I) e = Tables and charts
e Pictures of objects
arranged in rows and
columns
e Calculators
2 | Measurements | Approximation and Errors | @ Measuring instruments
and Geometry like measuring cylinder,
metre rule, tape measure,
e Calculator
@ Stop watch
Angle Properties of a e Geometrical instruments
Circle e Drawing book
e Circular objects and
rings
e@ Strings
Commercial Arithmetic e@ Sample cash book
e Income tax table from
KRA
@ Sample pay slips
e Pictures showing cash
price and hire purchase
prices
Circles, Chords and @ Geometrical instruments
Tangents e@ Drawing book
e Circular objects and
rings

$1

© Strings
Trigonometry (IT) e@ Graph paper

e@ Geometrical set/tools

e Graph boards
Graphical Methods e Graph paper

¢ Geometrical set/tools

e Graph boards

3 | Statistics and | Permutations and e Assorted objects
probability combinations e calculator
Probability II e Dice
® coins

e glass marbles of
different colours
@ calculators
4 | Calculus Functions e Graph paper
© charts
e Calculator
Differentiation (I) e@ Graph paper
e@ Ropes
e Stop watch
e Ruler
e Calculator

52

APPENDIX 2: GENERAL RESOURCES

The following ICT tools may be used in learning and teaching of Mathematics at this level
1. Learner digital devices (LDD)


The following ICT tools may be used in learning and teaching of Mathematics at this level
1. Learner digital devices (LDD)
2. Teacher digital devices (TDD)
3. Mobile phones
4. Digital clocks
5. Television sets
6. Videos and animations
7. Cameras
8. Projectors
9. Radios
10. Learners books
11. Teachers guides
12. Teachers hand book
13. Internet
14. Manilla papers
15. Realia

53
