KIC
KENYA INSTITUTE OF CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT
A Skilled and Ethical Society

SENIOR SCHOOL CURRICULUM DESIGN

PHYSICS
GRADE 11

OCTOBER, 2025

First Published in 2025

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transcribed, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopy, recording or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the publisher.

ISBN: 978-9914-43-061-5

Published and printed by Kenya Institute of Curriculum Development

TABLE OF CONTENTS
NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION

THE SENIOR SCHOOL IN THE COMPETENCY BASED CURRICULUM.

LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SENIOR SCHOOL .......... - . . = aes si ace
TABLE 1: LIST OF SUBJECTS AT SENIOR SCHOOL .... Le >. vee . woe wee
TABLE 2: LESSON DISTRIBUTION AT SENIOR SCHOOL

ESSENCE STATEMENT..............

GENERAL LEARNING OUTCOMES.
PROPOSED STRANDS ...........:sssssssssesscsesssneseesesesooesa
SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS.......
STRAND 1.0 MECHANICS AND THERMAL PHYSICS..
STRAND 2.0 WAVES AND OPTICS... oe
STRAND 3.0 ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM .........
STRAND 4.0 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SPACE PHYSICS.....
APPENDIX: LIST OF ASSESSMENT METHODS, LEARNING RESOURCES AND NO!

|-FORMAL ACTIVITIES...



NATIONAL GOALS OF EDUCATION

Education in Kenya should:

1. Foster nationalism and patriotism and promote national unity.
Kenya’s people belong to different communities, races, and religions, but these differences need not divide them. They must be
able to live and interact as Kenyans. It is a paramount duty of education to help young people acquire this sense of nationhood by
resolving conflicts and promoting positive attitudes of mutual respect which enable them to live together in harmony and foster
patriotism to make a positive contribution to the life of the nation.

2. Pr the social, ec ic, technological, and industrial needs for national development.

Education should prepare the youth of the country to play an effective and productive role in the life of the nation.

a) Social Needs
Education in Kenya must prepare children for changes in attitudes and relationships which are necessary for the smooth
progress of a rapidly developing modern economy. There is bound to be a silent social revolution following the wake of rapid
modernisation. Education should assist our youth in adapting to this change.

b) Economic Needs
Education in Kenya should produce citizens with the skills, knowledge, expertise, and personal qualities that are required to
support a growing economy. Kenya is building up a moder and independent economy which needs an adequate and relevant
domestic workforce.

c) Technological and Industrial Needs
Education in Kenya should provide learners with the necessary skills and attitudes for industrial development. Kenya
recognises the rapid industrial and technological changes taking place, especially in the developed world. We can only be part
of this development if our education system is deliberately focused on the knowledge, skills, and attitudes that will prepare our
young people for these changing global trends.

3. Promote individual development and self-fulfilment.
Education should provide opportunities for the fullest development of individual talents and personality. It should help children to
develop their potential interests and abilities. A vital aspect of individual development is the building of character.

4, Promote sound moral and religious values.
Education should provide for the development of knowledge, skills, and attitudes that will enhance the acquisition of sound moral
values and help children to grow up into self-disciplined, self-reliant, and integrated citizens.

5. Promote social equity and responsibility.
Education should promote social equality and foster a sense of social responsibility within an education system that provides equal
educational opportunities for all. It should give all children varied and challenging opportunities for collective activities and
corporate social service irrespective of gender, ability, or geographical environment.

6. Promote respect for and development of Kenya’s rich and varied cultures.
Education should instill in the youth of Kenya an understanding of past and present cultures and their valid place in contemporary
society. Children should be able to blend the best of traditional values with the changing requirements that must follow rapid
development to build a stable and modern society.

7. Promote international consciousness and foster positive attitudes towards other nations.
Kenya is part of the international community. It is part of the complicated and interdependent network of peoples and nations.
Education should therefore lead the youth of the country to accept membership of this international community with all the
obligations and responsibilities, rights, and benefits that this membership entails.

8. Promote positive attitudes towards good health and environmental protection.
Education should inculcate in young people the value of good health for them to avoid indulging in activities that will lead to
physical or mental ill health. It should foster positive attitudes towards environmental development and conservation. It should
lead the youth of Kenya to appreciate the need for a healthy environment.

THE SENIOR SCHOOL IN THE COMPETENCY BASED CURRICULUM
Senior School is the fourth level of Basic Education in the Competency Based Curriculum (CBC) that the learner shall proceed to after the
Pre-Primary School, Primary School and Junior School levels. The essence of Senior School is to offer learners a pre-tertiary/university/
pre-career experience in which the learners have an opportunity to choose pathways, tracks and subjects where they shall have demonstrated
interest and/or potential at the earlier levels. Senior School comprises three years of education for leamers generally in the 16-18 years age
bracket and lays the foundation for further education and training at the tertiary level and the world of work. In the CBC vision, learners
exiting this level are expected to be engaged, empowered and ethical citizens ready to participate in the socio-economic development of
the nation.

At this level, the learner shall take seven (7) learning areas as recommended by the Presidential Working Party on Educational Reforms
(PWPER, 2023). These shall comprise four compulsory learning areas namely: English, Kiswahili, Essential Mathematics/Core
Mathemat: d Community Service Learning (CSL). Learners will choose between Core Mathematics (for learners pursuing the Science
Technology Engineering and Mathematics Pathway) and Essential Mathematics (for learners pursuing the non-STEM pathways). The
learner will select three learning areas depending on their career choice, aptitude, interest and personality with guidance by the Senior
School career teacher.

LEARNING OUTCOMES FOR SENIOR SCHOOL,

By the end of Senior School, the learner should be able to:

1. communicate effectively and utilise information and communication technology across varied contexts,
2. apply mathematical, logical and critical thinking skills for problem solving,

3. apply basic research and scientific skills to manipulate the environment and solve problems,

4. — exploit individual talents for leisure, self-fulfilment, career growth, further education and training,
5. uphold national, moral and religious values and apply them in day-to-day life,

6. apply and promote health care strategies in day-to-day life,

7. protect, preserve and improve the environment for sustainability,

8. demonstrate active local and global citizenship for harmonious co-existence,

9. demonstrate appreciation of diversity in people and cultures,

10. manage pertinent and contemporary issues responsibly.


8. demonstrate active local and global citizenship for harmonious co-existence,
9. demonstrate appreciation of diversity in people and cultures,
10. manage pertinent and contemporary issues responsibly.

iv

TABLE 1: LIST OF SUBJECTS AT SENIOR SCHOOL

Core Subjects Arts & Sports Science | Social Sciences Science, Technology, Engineering &
Mathematics (STEM)
T. English 3. Sports and 9. Literature in English 23. Biology
2. Kiswahili/KSL Recreation 10. Indigenous Languages 24. Chemistry
3. Core Mathematics/ 6. Musicand Dance | 11. Fasihi ya Kiswahili 25. Physics
Essential Mathematics 7. Theatre and Film 12. Sign Language 26. General Science
4. Community Service 8. Fine Arts 13. Arabic 27. Agriculture
Learning (CSL) 14. French 28. Computer Studies
15. German 29. Home Science
16. Mandarin Chinese 30. Aviation
17. Christian Religious Education 31. Building Construction
18. Islamic Religious Education 32. Electricity
19. Hindu Religious Education 33. Metalwork
20. Business Studies 34. Power Mechanics
21. History and Citizenship 35. Woodwork
22. Geography 36. Media Technology

37._Marine and Fisheries Technology

Note:
a) Physical Education (PE) and Information Communication and Technology (ICT) will be offered to all learners to facilitate learning,
enjoyment and acquisition of life skills.
b) Every school shall offer Pastoral/Religious Programme of Instruction (P/RPI) to enhance moral, spiritual and character development
of the learners.
¢) There shall be one (1) lesson for personal or group study to deepen knowledge and enhance skills in areas of choice by the learners.

Table 2 provides guidelines on distribution of lessons at Senior School.

TABLE 2: LESSON DISTRIBUTION AT SENIOR SCHOOL

Subjects No of Lessons Per Week
(40 minutes per lesson)

Core Subjects 4

1. English 5
2. Kiswahili 5
3._Essential Mathematics/Core Mathematics 5
4. Community Service Learning 3
Elective Subjects
5. Elective 1 5
6. Elective 2 5
7. Elective 3 5
* Physical Education 3
* ICT Skills 2
*PPI d
* Learner Personal /Group Study 1
Total Number of Lessons 40
vi
ESSENCE STATEMENT

Physics is a body of knowledge exploring the theories, principles and laws that govern natural phenomena observed in the
physical environment. The subject builds on the competencies introduced at Junior Secondary School level under the learning
area of Integrated Science. In vision 2030 and sessional papers No. 1 of 2005 and No. | of 2019, the importance of science,
technology and innovation has been prioritized for human capital development through education and training. Therefore,
Physics forms an integral part of the STEM subjects in the Basie Education Curriculum Framework. It employs a scientific
methodology of study with an emphasis on experimental approach to investigation, enhancing understanding of fundamental
scientific concepts and principles. This leads to the acquisition of knowledge, skills, attitudes and values through precise and
accurate scientific processes.

The subject provides the learner with opportunities to develop competencies by empowering them to be creative and innovative,
leading to independent approaches in problem solving and management of their environment. It also prepares students for further
training and the world of work by providing careers in STEM related pathways. The content will be anchored on Kolb’s
Experiential Learning Theory and Constructivism theory for teaching and learning. This theories state that learning is a
continuous cycle involving concrete experience, reflection, conceptualization and experimentation, where learners gain
knowledge by actively engaging with and reflecting on their experiences.

GENERAL LEARNING OUTCOMES

1. Relate Physics to technology and society to enhance the learner's appreciation of the physical environment.

2. Develop science process skills among learners through the use of appropriate instruments as they discover and explain the
order of the physical environment.

3. Apply basic research and scientific skills to maninulate the environment and solve human problems.


1. Relate Physics to technology and society tO enhance ie learner s appreciation OF the physical environment.

2. Develop science process skills among learners through the use of appropriate instruments as they discover and explain the
order of the physical environment.

3. Apply basic research and scientific skills to manipulate the environment and solve human problems.

4. Develop capacity for critical thinking through basic scientific skills and research in addressing pertinent & contemporary
issues affecting the society.

5. Apply the principles of Physics for enhancement of innovations and entrepreneurial skills for development.

vii

6. Use relevant skills and values to promote local and global citizenship for harmonious coexistence and appreciation of
diversity in people.
7. Acquire adequate knowledge, skills, values and attitudes to enhance exploitation of individual talents for leisure, self -
fulfillment, career growth, and for further education and training.
8. Apply acquired knowledge, skills, values, and attitudes for effective communication and utilization of information in
technological advancement.

PROPOSED STRANDS

1. Mechanics and Thermal Physics
2. Waves and Optics

3. Electricity and Magnetism

4. Environmental and Space Physics

viii

SUMMARY OF STRANDS AND SUB STRANDS

Strand Sub Strand

1. Mechanics and Thermal Physics 1.1 Fluid flow
1.2 Linear Motion
1.3 Projectile motion.
1.4 Dimensional analysis
1.5 Heat Transmission

2.0 Waves and Optics 2.1 Refraction of light
2.2 Electromagnetic waves

2.3 Thermionic emission and its applications

3.0 Electricity and Magnetism 3.1 Capacitors
3.2 Magnetic effect of electric current
3.3 Diodes

4.0 Environmental and Space Physics 4.1 Physies of wind formation

4.2 Introduction to Rockets

ix

STRAND 1.0 MECHANICS AND THERMAL PHYSICS

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)

1.0 Mechanics 1.1 Fluid Flow By the end of the sub The leamer is guided to: Why do birds and
and Thermal strand, the learner le discuss with peers the meaning and | fish have a
Physics e Types of fluid should be able to: types of fluid flow, streamline shape?

flow (steady a) explain fluid flow le carry out activities to demonstrate

flow, unsteady as used in types of fluid flow,

flow, laminar mechanics, le use locally available materials to

Slow, turbulent b) describe types of carry out activities to verify

flow, transitional fluid flow as used Bernoulli’s Principle,

flow, in mechanics, le discuss with peers the stability of a

compressible c) verify Bernoulli’s vehicle in motion and safety


flow, transitional | fluid flow as used Bernoulli’s Principle,

flow, in mechanics, le discuss with peers the stability of a
compressible c) verify Bernoulli’s vehicle in motion and safety
flow, principle as used in around it in relation to Bernoulli's
incompressible fluid flow, Principle (Risk Awareness and
flow and viscous | d) derive equation Management on road users; risky
flow). of continuity in road behaviors such as speeding),
e Bernoulli's fluid flow, le work with peers to derive equation
principle and its | ¢) describe the of continuity as used in fluid flow,
applications. applications of use print or non-print resources to
@ Equation of Bemoulli’s search for information on
continuity. principle in real verification of Bernoulli’s
1
@ Bernoulli's effect life situation, Principle and the derivation of
and its f) appreciate the equation of continuity in fluid
applications. applications of flow,
Bernoulli’s je discuss with peers the applications
principle in day-to- of Bernoulli’s principle in real life
day life. situation,

use print or non-print resources to
search for more information on
applications of Bernoulli’s
principle in real life situations.

Core competencies to be developed

e Communication and collaboration: the speaking and listening skills are developed as the learner speaks engagingly while
discussing with peers the applications of Bernoulli’s principle in real life situations.

e Learning to learn: the learner practices how to work with care and attention to details as they carry out activities to
demonstrate types of fluid flow.

Values

e Respect: the learner learns to appreciate diverse opinions from peers as they discuss with peers the relationship between
Bernoulli’s Principle and the stability of a vehicle in motion.

@ Peace: the learner shows care by avoiding hurting others while carrying out activities to demonstrate types of fluid flow.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues

Socio-Economic and Environmental Issues.

e Safety and Security: the learner learns how to take precautions as they discuss with peers the stability of a vehicle in motion
and safety around it in relation to Bernoulli's Principle.

2
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry Question(s)

1.0 Mechanics | 1.2 Linear Motion By the end of the sub The leamer is guided to: 1. Whyis it
and Thermal | e Terminologies used | strand, the learner should discuss with peers the important to
Physics in linear motion. be able to: terminologies used in linear observe road

(distance, a) explain the motion, speed limits?

displacement, speed, terminologies used in © use print or non-print 2. How can

velocity, linear motion, resources to search for the equations of

instantaneous b) determine speed and meaning the terminologies uniformly

velocity and speed, acceleration of moving used in linear motion, accelerated

variable velocity, object, e perform experiments with motion be

acceleration and c) plot motion time graphs peers to determine speed and applied in day-

rectilinear motion). in linear motion, acceleration of a moving to-day life?

 Motion-time graphs | d) apply equations of object,

(distance — time, uniformly accelerated e discuss with peers the need to

displacement - time, motion to solve observe road speed limits for

speed - time, numerical tasks in linear safety of road users,

velocity — time motion, © carry out activities leading to

graphs for bodies e) describe the applications plotting and analyzing motion

that are stationary, of linear motion in real time graphs,

bodies moving with life situations, @ use relevant quantities to

uniform f) appreciate the derive equations of uniformly

speed/velocity and applications of linear accelerated motion:

bodies with variable motion in day-to-day

3
speed/velocity). life. e@ v=u+at
Equations of
uniformly s=ut+ il

accelerated motion. ee

@ use equations of uniformly
accelerated motion to solve
problems related to linear
motion in day-to-day life of
uniformly accelerated motion
(shortest distance, braking
force and overtaking speed).


State —- \ane Melee alin
uniformly accelerated motion
(shortest distance, braking
force and overtaking speed),

use print or digital resources
to search for information on
motion time graphs,
derivation and application of
equations of uniformly
accelerated motion in linear
motion,

e determine acceleration due to
gravity using equations of
linear motion,

e discuss with peers
applications of linear motion
in real life situations.

Core competencies to be developed

e Digital Literacy: the learner develops digital manipulative skills as they use non print media to search for information on motion
time graphs, derivation and application of equations of uniformly accelerated objects in linear motion.

Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner explores different possible solutions as they use equations of uniformly
accelerated motion to solve problems related to linear motion in day-to-day life of uniformly accelerated motion.

Values

Patriotism: the learner practices following laid down procedure and regulations as they perform experiments with peers to
determine speed and acceleration of a moving object.

e Integrity: the learner practices generating and using own data while carrying out activities to plot and analyzing motion time
graphs.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues:

Socio-Economic and Environmental Issues.

e Safety and Security: the learner learns the concepts of road safety and security as they discuss with peers the need to observe
road speed limits for safety of road users.

5
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
1.0 Mechanics | 1.3 Projectile Motion | By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: Why does an
and Thermal | e Free fall. strand, the learner should e brainstorm on the meaning of object thrown
Physics @ Projectile motion be able to: gravity as used in physics, upwards from
e (Vertical and a) explain gravity as used | @ carry outactivities to earth’s surface
horizontal in physics, demonstrate free fall of an object | fall back to the
projection). b) demonstrate free fall of due to gravity, ground?
@ Trajectory motion. an object due to gravity, | e discuss with peers the effects of
Acceleration due to | c) illustrate vertical and free fall on the speed of a car
gravity. horizontal projectile moving down the inclined plane,
motions due to gravity, | @ carry out activities to
d) determine acceleration demonstrate vertical and
due to gravity, horizontal projectile motions, of
e) illustrate the trajectory an object due to gravity,
motion of bodies, © perform an experiment to
f) appreciate the determine the acceleration of an
importance of object due to gravity,
acceleration due to © use print or non-print resources
gravity in day-to-day to search for information on
life. vertical projectile motion,
horizontal projectile motion and
free fall of an object due to
6

gravity,
e carry out activities to illustrate
the trajectory motion of bodies,
e discuss with peers the
importance of projectile motion
in real life experience.



EE ee
importance of projectile motion
in real life experience.

Core competencies to be developed

e Critical Thinking and Problem Solving: the learner explores different possible solutions to a problem as they discuss the
effects of free fall on the speed of a car moving down the inclined plane.

e Creativity and imagination: the learner combines different concepts as they use creativity as they carry out activities to
illustrate the trajectory motion of bodies.

Values

e Integrity: the learner practices the use of resources sparingly as they carry out activities to demonstrate the free fall of an
object due to gravity.

e Responsibility: the learner plays different roles as they carry out activities to illustrate the trajectory motion of bodies.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues
Socio-economic issues
Safety: the learner observes safety as they carry out activities to demonstrate free fall of an object due to gravity.

7
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Key Inquiry
Outcomes Question(s)
1.0 Mechanics | 1.4 Dimensional By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: Why should
and Thermal | analysis strand, the learner should | @ use print or non-print resources to | dimensional
Physics be able to: search for the meaning of analysis be
¢ Confirming the a) describe the meaning of | dimensional analysis as used in conducted
correctness of dimensional analysis as physics, before using
formulae and units used in physics, © discuss with peers the meaning of formulae?
involving mass, b) verify the correctness dimensional analysis as used in
length, time, of formulae using basic physics,
electric current and units in physics, e use mass, length, time, electric
temperature. c) appreciate the need of current, temperature and their
dimensional analysis in units to verify the correctness of
formulae and units. basic physics-related formulae,

e discuss with peers the need of
dimensional analysis in formulae
and units

Core competencies to be developed:

e Self-Efficacy: as the learner develops confidence in using the common physics-related formulae as they use mass, length,
time, electric current and temperature to verify the correctness of the formulae.

e Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner practices analysis of formulae and reasoning to solve an equation-related
task as they verify the correctness of basic physics-related formulae.

Values
Respect: the learner learns to respect diverse opinions as they discuss with peers the need of dimensional analysis in formulae
and units of basic quantities.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues

Citizenship education

e Social Cohesion: the learner appreciates the globally used formulas in physics as they verify the correctness of basic physics-
related formulae.

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Outcomes | Suggested Learning Key Inguirv


Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Outcomes | Suggested Learning Key Inquiry

Experiences Question(s)
1.0 Mechanics | 1.5 Heat By the end of the sub strand, The learner is guided to: 1. How is heat
and Thermal Transmission the learner should be able to: discuss with peers the meaning | transmitted in
Physics e Heat a) explain heat as used in of heat as used in thermal solid, liquid, and
@ Modes of heat thermal physics, physics, gas?
transmission b) describe modes of heat © carry out activities to
(conduction, transmission in matter, demonstrate the modes of heat | 2.How does a
radiation, and c) demonstrate modes of heat transmission in matter, vacuum flask
convection). transmission in matter, e discuss with peers the maintain the
e Applications of | d) describe applications of applications of various modes | temperature of a
heat various modes of heat of heat transmission in real-life | liquid?
transmission. transmission in day-to-day experience,
life, © use print or non-print resources
e) appreciate the applications to search for more information
of various modes of heat on the applications of heat
transmission in day-to-day transmission in real life
life. experience.

Core competencies to be developed:

¢ Imagination and Creativity: the learner generates ideas on how to handle objects at different temperatures as they discuss with
peers the applications of various modes of heat transmission in real-life experience.

e Digital literacy: the leamer develops digital manipulative skills while interacting with technology as they use non-print media
to search for more information on the applications of heat transmission in real life experience.

10

Values

e Respect: the learner practices how to value diverse opinions of peers as they discuss the applications of various modes of heat
transmission in real-life experience.

e Responsibility: the learner engages in assigned roles and duties as they carry out activities to demonstrate the modes of heat
transmission in matter.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)
Socio-Economic and Environmental Issues: the learner develops safety and security skills while dealing with heat as they carry
out activities to demonstrate the modes of heat transmission in matter.

11

ASSESSMENT RUBRIC (HOLISTIC)

Level Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation
Indicator Expectation
Ability to describe | Correctly describes all Correctly describes all} Describes at most 5 types | Describes at most 2
types of fluid flow | types of fluid flow as used | types of fluid flow as __| of fluid flow as used in types of fluid flow as
as used in in mechanics, giving used in mechanics. mechanics. used in mechanics.
mechanics. relevant illustrations.
Ability to explain | Correctly and Correctly explains the | Explains the applications | Explains the application
the applications of | comprehensively explains | applications of of Bernoulli’s principle | of Bernoulli’s principle
Bernoulli’s the applications of Bernoulli’s principle in real life situations, in real-life situations,
principle in real Bernoulli's principle in in real life situations. _ | leaving out some key given hints.
life situations. real life situations. words.
Ability to apply Correctly and consistently | Correctly applies all Applies at most 2 Applies 1 of the
equations of applies equations of equations of uniformly | equations of uniformly | equations of uniformly
uniformly uniformly accelerated accelerated motion to | accelerated motion to accelerated motion to
accelerated motion | motion to solve numerical | solve numerical tasks | solve numerical tasks in | solve numerical tasks in
to solve numerical | tasks in linear motion. in linear motion. linear motion. linear motion.
tasks in linear
motion
Ability to Correctly and consistently | Correctly determines | Partially determines Determines acceleration
determine determines acceleration acceleration due to acceleration due to due to gravity, with
acceleration due to | due to gravity. gravity. gravity. hints.

12


Level Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicator Expectation
gravity.
Ability to verify Correctly and consistently | Correctly verifies the | Verifies the correctness _| Verifies the correctness
the correctness of | verifies the correctness of | correctness of all of at most half of the of at most quarter of the
formulae using all formulae using basic formulae using basic | formulae using basic formulae using basic
basic units in units in physics. units in physics. units in physics. units in physics.
physics.
Ability to Correctly demonstrates all | Correctly demonstrates | Demonstrates at most Demonstrates at most
demonstrate modes | modes of heat all modes of heat two of the modes of heat | one of the modes of heat
of heat transmission in matter, transmission in matter. | transmission in matter. transmission in matter.
transmission in giving illustrations over
matter. the same.
Ability to describe | Correctly describes at Correctly describes at | Correctly describes two | Correctly describes at
applications of least four applications of _ | least three applications | applications of various most one application of
various modes of __| various modes of heat of various modes of modes of heat various modes of heat
heat transmission _ | transmission in day-to-day | heat transmission in transmission in day-to- _ | transmission in day-to-
in day-to-day life. | life. day-to-day life. day life. day life.

13

STRAND 2.0 WAVES AND OPTICS

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Waves | 2.1 Refraction of By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guided to: 1.How is
and Optics | light the learner should be able to: | e discuss with peers the meaning knowledge of
e Verification of laws | a) explain refraction of light of refraction of light, refraction of light
of refraction of as used in waves, @ perform experimental activities | important in day-
light. b) verify the laws of to verify refraction of light using | to-day life?
e Determination of refraction of light as used locally available materials,
refractive indices of in light waves, © carry out experimental activities | 2. How is the
materials. c) determine refractive to determine refractive indices of | rainbow formed?
e Dispersion of white index of a material from materials using locally available
light. the law of refraction, materials,
e Light filtration, d) describe dispersion and @ derive the mathematical
e Total internal filtration of white light, formulae of refractive index
teflection, effects, e) illustrate total internal from the law of refraction,
and applications. reflection of light in real- |e discuss with peers the dispersion
life situations, and filtration of white light,
f) appreciate the e work with others to illustrate the
applications of total total internal reflection of light in
internal reflection of light real-life situations,
in day-to-day life. e discuss with peers the effects and

applications of total internal

14

reflection,

© use print or non-print resources
to search for more information
on the applications of total
internal reflection.

Core competencies to be developed:

e Communication and collaboration: the learner acquires good communication skills as they discuss with peers the effects and
applications of total internal reflection.

e Self-efficacy: the learner develops self-confidence in mathematical application concepts as they derive mathematical formulae
of refractive index from the law of refraction.

Values

e Respect: the learner practices respecting diverse opinions as they discuss with peers the dispersion and filtration of white light.

e Integrity: the learner practices how to be accountable on the prudent utilization of available resources as they carry out
experimental activities to determine refractive indices of materials using locally available materials.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues:
Socio economic and environmental issues: the learner develops safety and security as they carry out experimental acti

determine refractive indices of materials using locally available materials.

15


15

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
2.0 Waves | 2.2 Electromagnetic | By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guided to: How is
and Optics | waves the learner should be able to: | e discuss with others the production | electromagnetic
a) explain production and and detection of electromagnetic | wave important
Production, detection of waves, in day-to-day
properties, detection electromagnetic waves, @ arrange electromagnetic spectrum | life?
and applications of | b) arrange electromagnetic in order of increasing frequencies,
electromagnetic spectrum in order of @ describe the properties of
waves. increasing frequencies, electromagnetic waves,
Hazards of E.M c) describe the properties of | ¢ determine the energy of the
radiation and safety. electromagnetic waves, electromagnetic waves using
d) describe the hazards of mathematical formula,
electromagnetic waves, e discuss with peers the hazards of
e) describe the applications electromagnetic
of electromagnetic waves radiations,
in real life situation, e discuss with peers the
f) appreciate the applications of electromagnetic
applications of waves in nature (Radio waves,
electromagnetic waves in Microwaves, Infrared radiation,
day- to- day life. Visible light, Ultraviolet
radiation, X-rays and Gamma
rays).
16

Core competencies

¢ Critical thinking and problem solving: the learner learns how to evaluate and make decisions on the suitable property of an
electromagnetic wave as they arrange the electromagnetic spectrum in order of increasing frequencies of a wave.

e Learning to learn: the learner works in care and attention to details as they arrange the electromagnetic spectrum in order of
increasing frequencies.

Values

e Respect: the learner practices open-mindedness with different opinions from peers as they discuss the applications of
electromagnetic waves in nature.

e Social justice: the learner practices the act of giving equal opportunities to each other in contributing their views as they
discuss with peers the hazards of electromagnetic waves.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues

Health promotion issues

e Effects and preventive measures: the learner acquires skills on how to prevent electromagnetic waves related health issues as
they discuss with peers the hazards of electromagnetic waves.

17
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Key Inquiry
Outcomes Question(s)
2.0 Waves | 2.3 Thermionic By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guided to: How does a
and Optics | emission and its the learner should be able to: | e discuss with peers production CRO and X-ray
applications a) explain the production and properties of cathode rays in | work?
e Production of cathode and properties of cathode waves (Cathode ray tube, CRO),
Tays and their Tays in waves, © carry out experiments to analyze
properties. b) use CRO to analyze the the frequency and amplitude of a
e CRO and its frequency and amplitude wave using CRO,
applications. of a wave, @ discuss with peers the production
e Production and c) describe the production and properties of X-rays,
properties of X-rays. and properties of X-rays, |. use equations E = he vand
e Applications of X- d) determine the energy of hec to determine the
rays. X-rays using B= 2
e Safety precautions. mathematical formulae energy of X-rays,
e) explain safety discuss with peers the safety
precautions necessary precautions necessary when
when handling X-rays handling X-rays equipment,
f) appreciate the use print or non-print resources
applications of X-rays to search for more information
and CRO in day-to-day on applications of CRO and X-
life. rays, and safety precautions

necessary when handling X-rays.



- —_—- on applications of CRO and X-
life. rays, and safety precautions
necessary when handling X-rays.

18

Core competencies

e Communication and collaboration: the learner develops science language communication skills as they discuss with peers the
necessary safety precautions when handling X-ray equipment.

Digital Literacy: the learner acquires digital manipulative skills as they use digital devices to search for more information on
applications of CRO and X-rays.

Values

e Respect: as the learner shows open-mindedness as they discuss with peers the production and properties of cathode rays in
waves.

e Unity: the learner cooperates in achieving a common goal as they carry out experiments to analyze the frequency and
amplitude of a wave using CRO

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues
Socio-economic and environmental issues
Safety and security: the learner discusses with peers the safety precautions necessary when handling X-ray equipment.

19
ASSESSMENT RUBRIC (HOLISTIC)
Level Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicator —~~_ Expectation
Ability to explain Correctly and Correctly explains Partially explains the | Explains the applications
the applications of | comprehensively applications total internal | applications of total __| of total internal
total internal explains applications of | reflection of light in day- internal reflection of | reflection of light in day-
reflection of light in | total internal reflection _ | to-day life. light in day-to-day to-day life, with prompt.
day-to-day life. of light in day-to-day life.

life.
Ability to describe | Correctly and Correctly describes the Partially describes With prompt, describes
the properties of comprehensively properties of the properties of the properties of
electromagnetic describes the properties | electromagnetic waves. electromagnetic electromagnetic waves.
waves. of electromagnetic waves.

waves.
Ability to describe | Correctly and Correctly describes the Partially describes With prompt, describes
the applications of | comprehensively applications of the applications of the application of
electromagnetic describes the electromagnetic waves in electromagnetic electromagnetic waves
waves in real-life applications of real life situation. waves in real life in real life situation.
situation. electromagnetic waves in situation.

real life situation.
Ability to describe | Correctly and Correctly describes Partially describes With prompt, describes
the production and | comprehensively production and properties | production and production and

20
Level | Exceeds Expectation _} Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation

Indicator ae Expectation
properties of describes production and | of cathode rays. properties of cathode | properties of cathode
cathode rays. properties of cathode rays. rays.

rays.
Ability to explain | Correctly and Correctly explains the Partially explains the | With prompt, explains
the production and | comprehensively production and applications | production and the production and
applications of X- | explains the production _| of X-rays. applications of X- applications of X-rays.
rays. and applications of X- rays.

rays.



21

STRAND 3.0 ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
3.0 Electricity 3.1 Capacitors By the end of the sub strand, | The learner is guided to: What is the
and Magnetism | e Electric field the learner should be able to: | e search for meaning of terminologies | significance of
patterns. a) explain terminologies associated with static charges using | capacitors in
@ Force between associated with static print or non-print resources (electric | electrical
charges. charges, field, electric field patterns, appliances?
Capacitors and b) determine the amount of capacitors and capacitance),
capacitor force between charges, |e draw electric field patterns between
networks c) describe types of charged particles,
(capacitor types, capacitors with their e apply Coulomb's law to determine
charge and respective applications the magnitude of force between
discharge, d) illustrate charging and charged particles,
capacitance). discharging of a @ discuss with peers types of
@ Applications of capacitor, capacitors with their respective
capacitors. e) determine capacitance of applications,
acapacitor and effective | e perform experiments to illustrate
capacitance. charging and discharging a
f) appreciate the capacitor using graphs in
application of determination of energy stored in a
capacitors. capacitor,

esearch from print or non-print

22

resources the mathematical
formulae used to determine
capacitance and effective
capacitance (factors affecting
capacitance, capacitor networks),

@ use print or non-print resources to
search and discuss with peers the
applications of capacitors in real life
situations.

Core competencies to be developed

e Learning to learn: the learner learns new skills as they perform experiments to illustrate charging and discharging a capacitor
using graphs in determination of energy stored in a capacitor.

Creativity and imagination: the learner uses creativity in work context as they perform experiments to illustrate charging and
discharging a capacitor using graphs in determination of energy stored in a capacitor.

Values

@ Responsibility: the learner develops accountability as they take care of apparatus while carrying out an experiment to determine
energy stored in a capacitor.

e Respect: as the learner shows open-mindedness as they appreciate diverse opinions of others while sketching electric fields.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues
Socio-economic and environmental issues: the learner practices safety and security in the laboratories while carrying out an
experiment to determine energy stored in a capacitor.

23
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Experiences | Suggested Key
Outcomes Inquiry
Question(s)
3.0 Electricity 3.2 Magnetic effect | By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: How does a
and Magnetism | of electric current | strand, the learner should | e perform experiments to motor work?
Magnetization and | be able to: demonstrate magnetization and
demagnetization a) explain demagnetization,
(domain theory of magnetization and © search using print or non-print
magnetism). demagnetization resources to explain
@ Magnetic field due using domain theory magnetization and
to a current. of magnetism, demagnetization using domain
e Electromagnets. b) investigate the theory of magnetism,
Motor effect. magnetic effect of a @ perform experiments to

e Applications of current flowing investigate the magnetic effect


aa: naitiee __ tie! teameaenell dees. eaten

e Electromagnets. b) investigate the theory of magnetism,
Motor effect. magnetic effect of a @ perform experiments to
Applications of current flowing investigate the magnetic effect
magnetic effect of through a conductor, of a current flowing through a
electric current. c) describe the working conductor,
ofan electromagnet, | e construct a working
d) describe the electromagnet using locally
direction of force available materials,
produced on a © visit a nearby garage, observe
current carrying the working of electromagnetic
conductor in a alternator and discuss the role it
magnetic field, plays in functioning as a motor
e) explain applications of a vehicle in line with safety
24
of magnetic effect of of road users,
an electric current in @ discuss with peers the factors
day-to-day life, affecting strength of an
f) appreciate the electromagnet,
applications of © carry out activities to describe
magnetic effect of the force produced on a current-
electric current in carrying conductor within a
day-to-day life. magnetic field

search using print and non-print
resources the applications of a
magnetic effect of electric
current ( electric bell, electric
motor, magnetic relay,
microphone, telephone receiver,
loud speaker, moving coil
meters, circuit breakers among
others).

Core competencies to be developed

Communication and collaboration: the learner develops speaking and listening skills as they discuss with peers the factors
affecting strength of an electromagnet.

Critical thinking and problem solving: the leamer practices the nature of evaluation and decision making to use the suitable
material as they model a working electromagnet.

Values
e Social Justice: the learner practices sharing resources equitably as they model a working electromagnet.

25

© Unity: the learner cooperates with others in striving to achieve common goals when performing experiments to establish the
relationship between electric current and magnetism.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues
Socio-Economic Issues: the learner learns how to observe road safety as they observe the working of electromagnetic
alternators and discuss the role it plays in functioning as a motor of a vehicle in line with safety of road users.

26

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Outcomes | Suggested Learning Experiences Suggested Key
Inquiry
Question(s)

3.0 Electricity 3.3 Diodes By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: How have p-n
and Magnetism | @ P-N Junction _| strand, the learner ¢ discuss with peers the formation | junction diodes
diodes and should be able to: of a p-n junction diode, promoted the
biasing. a) explain the formation perform an experiment to development of
e P-N Junction and biasing process of a illustrate the biasing of a p-n electronics?
characteristics p-n junction diode, junction,


biasing. a) explain the formation e perform an experiment to development of

e P-N Junction and biasing process of a illustrate the biasing of a p-n electronics?
characteristics p-n junction diode, junction,
@ Types of b) describe the e design and perform an
diodes and characteristics of a p-n experiment to show the current-
their uses. junction diode, voltage (I-V) characteristics of a
¢) explain the applications p-n junction diode for forward
of p-n junction diodes in and reverse biased modes,
day-to-day life, e work with peers in creation ofa
d) identify types of diodes model to describe application of
used in electronics, p-n junction diode in
e) describe application of p- rectification process using
n junction diode in locally available resources (half-
rectification, wave rectification and full-wave
f) appreciate the rectification),
application of diodes in| use print and non-print resources
daily lives. to search for information on

different types of diodes and

27

their applications in day-to-day
life.

Core competencies to be developed:
© Creativity and Imagination: the learner practices combining different concepts to generate ideas while designing and
performing experiments to show the I-V characteristics of a p-n junction diode for forward and reverse biased modes.

Values

e Unity: the learner appreciates efforts of others while designing and performing an experiment to show the I-V characteristics
of a p-n junction diode for forward and reverse biased modes.

¢ Responsibility: the learner takes care of apparatus used while performing experiments to illustrate the biasing of a p-n
junction.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues
Socio-Economic and Environmental Issues: the learner acquires manipulative skills in designing safety and security gadgets in
the environment as they perform an experiment to illustrate the biasing of a p-n junction.

28
ASSESSMENT RUBRIC (HOLISTIC)
Level Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Below Expectation
Indicator Expectation
Ability to illustrate Correctly and Correctly illustrates Partially illustrates Illustrates charging and
charging and systematically illustrates | charging and discharging | charging and discharging of
discharging of charging and discharging | of capacitors. discharging of capacitors, with
capacitors. of capacitors. capacitors. prompt.
Ability to determine | Correctly and Correctly determines Partially determines _ | Determines capacitance
capacitance of a consistently determines capacitance of a capacitor | capacitance of a of a capacitor and
capacitor and capacitance of a capacitor | and effective capacitance. | capacitor and effective capacitance,
effective capacitance. | and effective capacitance. effective capacitance. | with hints.
Ability to explain the | Correctly and Correctly explains the Partially explains the | Explains the
applications of comprehensively applications of magnetic | applications of applications of
magnetic effect of an | explains the applications | effect of an electric magnetic effect of an | magnetic effect of an
electric current in of magnetic effect of an | current in day- to- day electric current in electric current in day-
day- to- day life. electric current in day- life. day- to- day life. to-day life, with hints.
to- day life.
Ability to describe the | Correctly and Correctly describes the Partially describes the | Describes the formation
formation and biasing | comprehensively formation and biasing formation and biasing | and biasing process of a
process of a p-n describes the formation process of a p-n junction | process of a p-n p-n junction diode, with
junction diode. and biasing process ofa | diode. junction diode. cues.
p-n junction diode.
29

STRAND 4.0 ENVIRONMENTAL AND SPACE PHYSICS

Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
4.0 Environmental By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: 1. How is wind

and Space Physics 4.1 Physics of strand the learner should be | » use print or non-print formed?

Wind Formation a8. sn.



Question(s)

4.0 Environmental 4.1 Physics of By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: 1. How is wind
and Space Physics Win d Formation strand the learner should be | » use print or non-print formed? -
Wind patterns able to: resources to search for 2. How is wind
information on the types of formation

(polar easterlies, | a) describe the types of

A A fs wind patterns, applied in real-
ies =, ores Metin,‘ — © discuss with peers the types life situations?
winds and the b) describe forces acting of wind Pages in
doldrums). on air masses in the atmosphere, :

e Forces acting on atmosphere, Sause Prme Or: noe: pein
air masses c) describe the process of media to search for
(Pressure wind formation in the information on the forces
gradient force, environment, acting on air masses in the
Coriolis force, d) explain formation of atmosphere,
Turbulent drag). Cyclones and @ discuss with peers on how
© Cyclones and anticyclones cyclones and anticyclones
anticyclones. e) describe the importance contribute to wind
of wind formation in formation,
day-to-day life, e discuss with peers the

importance of wind
formation in nature.

e discuss with peers the
applications of wind

f) appreciate the
importance of wind
formation in nature.

30

[ [ [__ formation in real life. I

Core competencies to be developed:

e Digital literacy: the learner acquires digital manipulative skills as they use digital resources to search for information on the
forces acting on air masses in the atmosphere.

Communication and collaboration: the learner develops speaking skills as they speak engagingly while discussing with peers
on how cyclones and anticyclones contribute to wind formation.

Values
Respect: as the learner is patient with others during discussions with peers the applications of wind formation in real life

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs)
Socio-Economic and Environmental Issues: the learner acquires knowledge in prevention of global warming as they discuss with
peers the importance of wind formation in nature.

31
Strand Sub Strand Specific Learning Suggested Learning Suggested Key
Outcomes Experiences Inquiry
Question(s)
4.0 Environmental | 4.2 Introduction to | By the end of the sub The learner is guided to: How do rockets
and Space Physics | Rocket Science strand, the learner should |e brainstorm on the meaning | overcome Earth’s
@ Rocket be able to: of the terms rocket, gravity to travel
@ Main parts of a @ use print or non-print through space?
rocket a) explain the term rocket resources to search for
@ The forces as used in space information on the main
involved in space physics, parts of a rocket and their
flight as used jn __| 5) identify the main parts functions,
science. ofarocket as usedin | @ discuss the functions of the
space physics, main parts of a rocket,
c) demonstrate the © carry out activities to
upward motion of a design a rocket model using
rocket model, locally available materials,
d) explore the forces © carry out activities to
involved in space demonstrate upward motion
flight, of a rocket model using
e) describe the locally available materials
applications of rockets (include air balloon),
in nature, © carry out activities to
f) appreciate the examine forces involved in
applications of rockets space flight,
in day-to-day life. @ use print or non-print
32

resources to search for


resources to search for
information on applications
of rockets in day-to-day
life.

e discuss with peers the
applications of rockets in
day-to-day life.

Core competencies to be developed

e Imagination and Creativity: the learner combines different concepts to generate ideas as they carry out activities to design a
rocket model using locally available materials.

e Digital literacy: the learner acquires digital manipulative skills as they use digital resources to search for information on
applications of rockets in day-to-day life.

Values

e Responsibility: the learner shows accountability in playing different roles as they carry out activities to demonstrate upward
motion of a rocket using locally available materials.

e@ Unity: the learner appreciates each other’s efforts as they carry out activities to design a rocket model and demonstrate its
upward motion using locally available materials.

Pertinent and Contemporary Issues (PCIs):
Socio-Economic and Environmental Issues (safety and security): the learner appreciates the role of rockets for safety as they
discuss with peers the applications of rockets and satellites.

33
ASSESSMENT RUBRIC (HOLISTIC)
Level Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Expectation | Below Expectation
Indicator
Ability to describe Correctly and Correctly describes the | Partially describes the types | With hints, describes
the types of wind comprehensively types of wind patterns __| of wind patterns in the the types of wind
patterns in the describes the types of in the atmosphere. atmosphere. patterns in the
atmosphere. wind patterns in the atmosphere.
atmosphere.
Ability to describe Correctly and Correctly describes Partially describes forces With hint, describes
forces acting on air | comprehensively forces acting on air acting on air masses in the | forces acting on air
masses in the describes forces acting | masses in the atmosphere. masses in the
atmosphere. on air masses in the atmosphere. atmosphere.
atmosphere.
Ability to describe —_| Correctly and Correctly describes the | Partially describes the With hints, describes
the process of wind | comprehensively process of wind process of wind formation | the process of wind
formation in the describes the process of | formation in the in the environment. formation in the
environment. wind formation in the environment environment
environment.
Ability to Correctly and Correctly demonstrates Partially demonstrates upward | Demonstrates upward
demonstrate upward _ | innovatively upward motion of a rocket | motion of a rocket model. motion of a rocket
motion ofarocket | demonstrates upward model. model, with hints.
motion of a rocket
34

Level Exceeds Expectation Meets Expectation Approaches Expectation | Below Expectation
Indicator —

model. model.

Ability to explore Correctly explores all Correctly explores all Explores two forces Explores at most one

the forces involved _| forces involved in space | forces involved in space | involved in space flight force involved in

in space flight. flight, giving relevant flight. space flight.
illustrations.

35


APPENDIX: LIST OF ASSESSMENT METHODS, LEARNING RESOURCES AND NON-FORMAL ACTIVITIES

Assessment Methods in Science Learning Resources Non-Formal Activities
e Reflections e Laboratory Apparatus and e Visiting the science historical sites.
e Game Playing Equipment © Using digital devices to conduct
e Pre-Post Testing @ Textbooks scientific research.
@ Model Making e@ Models e Organising walks to have live learning
e Explorations e Digital media (Radio and TV experiences.
e Experiments education programmes, Kenya e Developing simple guidelines on how to
e Investigations Education Cloud and OERs) identify and solve some community
e Conventions, Conferences and e Print media (charts, pictures, problems.
Debates journals, magazines) e Conducting science document analysis.
Teacher Observations © Digital Devices Participating in talks by resource
e Project e Software persons on science concepts.
e Journals e Recordings e Participating in science clubs and
e Portfolio e Resource persons societies.
e Oral or Aural Question(s)s e Attending and participating in science
e Learner’s Profile and engineering fairs.
e Written Tests e Organising and participating in
e Anecdotal Records exchange programmes.

e@ Making oral presentations and
demonstrations on science issues.

36
